<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>APPENDIX</h2>
			<h4 id="id04979" style="margin-top: 2em">SIX SONNETS ON DANTE'S DIVINE COMEDY BY HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW (1807-1882)</h4>
			<h4 id="id04980" style="margin-top: 2em">I</h4>
			<p id="id04981">Oft have I seen at some cathedral door<br/>
			A laborer, pausing in the dust and heat,<br/>
			Lay down his burden, and with reverent feet<br/>
			Enter, and cross himself, and on the floor<br/>
			Kneel to repeat his paternoster o'er;<br/>
			Far off the noises of the world retreat;<br/>
			The loud vociferations of the street<br/>
			Become an undistinguishable roar.<br/>
			So, as I enter here from day to day,<br/>
			And leave my burden at this minster gate,<br/>
			Kneeling in prayer, and not ashamed to pray,<br/>
			The tumult of the time disconsolate<br/>
			To inarticulate murmurs dies away,<br/>
			While the eternal ages watch and wait.<br/></p>
			<h4 id="id04982" style="margin-top: 2em">II</h4>
			<p id="id04983">How strange the sculptures that adorn these towers!<br/>
			This crowd of statues, in whose folded sleeves<br/>
			Birds build their nests; while canopied with leaves<br/>
			Parvis and portal bloom like trellised bowers,<br/>
			And the vast minster seems a cross of flowers!<br/>
			But fiends and dragons on the gargoyled eaves<br/>
			Watch the dead Christ between the living thieves,<br/>
			And, underneath, the traitor Judas lowers!<br/>
			Ah! from what agonies of heart and brain,<br/>
			What exultations trampling on despair,<br/>
			What tenderness, what tears, what hate of wrong,<br/>
			What passionate outcry of a soul in pain,<br/>
			Uprose this poem of the earth and air,<br/>
			This mediaeval miracle of song!<br/></p>
			<h4 id="id04984" style="margin-top: 2em">III</h4>
			<p id="id04985">I enter, and I see thee in the gloom<br/>
			Of the long aisles, O poet saturnine!<br/>
			And strive to make my steps keep pace with thine.<br/>
			The air is filled with some unknown perfume;<br/>
			The congregation of the dead make room<br/>
			For thee to pass; the votive tapers shine;<br/>
			Like rooks that haunt Ravenna's groves of pine,<br/>
			The hovering echoes fly from tomb to tomb.<br/>
			From the confessionals I hear arise<br/>
			Rehearsals of forgotten tragedies,<br/>
			And lamentations from the crypts below<br/>
			And then a voice celestial that begins<br/>
			With the pathetic words, "Although your sins<br/>
			As scarlet be," and ends with "as the snow."<br/></p>
			<h4 id="id04986" style="margin-top: 2em">IV</h4>
			<p id="id04987">With snow-white veil, and garments as of flame,<br/>
			She stands before thee, who so long ago<br/>
			Filled thy young heart with passion and the woe<br/>
			From which thy song in all its splendors came;<br/>
			And while with stern rebuke she speaks thy name,<br/>
			The ice about thy heart melts as the snow<br/>
			On mountain heights, and in swift overflow<br/>
			Comes gushing from thy lips in sobs of shame.<br/>
			Thou makest full confession; and a gleam<br/>
			As of the dawn on some dark forest cast,<br/>
			Seems on thy lifted forehead to increase;<br/>
			Lethe and Eunoe—the remembered dream<br/>
			And the forgotten sorrow—bring at last<br/>
			That perfect pardon which is perfect peace.<br/></p>
			<h4 id="id04988" style="margin-top: 2em">V</h4>
			<p id="id04989">I Lift mine eyes, and all the windows blaze<br/>
			With forms of saints and holy men who died,<br/>
			Here martyred and hereafter glorified;<br/>
			And the great Rose upon its leaves displays<br/>
			Christ's Triumph, and the angelic roundelays,<br/>
			With splendor upon splendor multiplied;<br/>
			And Beatrice again at Dante's side<br/>
			No more rebukes, but smiles her words of praise.<br/>
			And then the organ sounds, and unseen choirs<br/>
			Sing the old Latin hymns of peace and love<br/>
			And benedictions of the Holy Ghost;<br/>
			And the melodious bells among the spires<br/>
			O'er all the house-tops and through heaven above<br/>
			Proclaim the elevation of the Host!<br/></p>
			<h4 id="id04990" style="margin-top: 2em">VI</h4>
			<p id="id04991">O star of morning and of liberty!<br/>
			O bringer of the light, whose splendor shines<br/>
			Above the darkness of the Apennines,<br/>
			Forerunner of the day that is to be!<br/>
			The voices of the city and the sea,<br/>
			The voices of the mountains and the pines,<br/>
			Repeat thy song, till the familiar lines<br/>
			Are footpaths for the thought of Italy!<br/>
			Thy fame is blown abroad from all the heights,<br/>
			Through all the nations; and a sound is heard,<br/>
			As of a mighty wind, and men devout,<br/>
			Strangers of Rome, and the new proselytes,<br/>
			In their own language hear thy wondrous word,<br/>
			And many are amazed and many doubt.<br/></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
