<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>POSTSCRIPT</h2>
<p id="id04993" style="margin-top: 2em">     'Ich habe unter meinen Papieren ein Blatt gefunden,<br/>

     wo ich die Baukunst eine erstarrte Musik nenne.'<br/>

        (Johann Wolfgang Goethe, 1829 March 23)<br/>
</p>
<p id="id04994">I found Dante in a bar.  The Poet had indeed lost the True Way to be found
reduced to party chatter in a Capitol Hill basement, but I had found him at
last.  I must have been drinking in the Dark Tavern of Error, for I did not
even realize I had begun the dolorous path followed by many since the
Poet's journey of A.D. 1300.  Actually no one spoke a word about Dante or
his Divine Comedy, rather I heard a second-hand Goethe call architecture
"frozen music."  Soon I took my second step through the gate to a people
lost; this time on a more respectable occasion—a lecture at the Catholic
University of America.  Clio, the muse of history, must have been aiding
Prof. Schumacher that evening, because it sustained my full three-hour
attention, even after I had just presented an all-night project.  There I
heard of a most astonishing Italian translation of 'la Divina Commedia' di
Dante Alighieri.  An Italian architect, Giuseppi Terragni, had translated
the Comedy into the 'Danteum,' a projected stone and glass monument to Poet
and Poem near the Basilica of Maxentius in Rome.</p>
<p id="id04995">Do not look for the Danteum in the Eternal City.  In true Dantean form,
politics stood in the way of its construction in 1938.  Ironically this
literature-inspired building can itself most easily be found in book form.
Reading this book I remembered Goethe's quote about frozen music.  Did
Terragni try to freeze Dante's medieval miracle of song?  Certainly a
cold-poem seems artistically repulsive.  Unflattering comparisons to the
lake of Cocytus spring to mind too.  While I cannot read Italian, I can read
some German.  After locating the original quotation I discovered that
'frozen' is a problematic (though common) translation of Goethe's original
'erstarrte.'  The verb 'erstarren' more properly means 'to solidify' or 'to
stiffen.'  This suggests a chemical reaction in which the art does not
necessarily chill in the transformation.  Nor can simple thawing yield the
original work.  Like a chemical reaction it requires an artistic catalyst, a
muse.  Indeed the Danteum is not a physical translation of the Poem.
Terragni thought it inappropriate to translate the Comedy literally into a
non-literary work.  The Danteum would not be a stage set, rather Terragni
generated his design from the Comedy's structure, not its finishes.</p>
<p id="id04996" style="margin-left: 6%; margin-right: 6%">     The poem is divided into three canticles of thirty-three cantos
     each, plus one extra in the first, the Inferno, making a total of
     one hundred cantos.  Each canto is composed of three-line tercets,
     the first and third lines rhyme, the second line rhymes with the
     beginning of the next tercet, establishing a kind of overlap,
     reflected in the overlapping motif of the Danteum design.  Dante's
     realms are further subdivided: the Inferno is composed of nine
     levels, the vestibule makes a tenth.  Purgatory has seven
     terraces, plus two ledges in an ante-purgatory; adding these to
     the Earthly Paradise yields ten zones.  Paradise is composed of
     nine heavens; Empyrean makes the tenth.  In the Inferno, sinners
     are organized by three vices—Incontinence, Violence, and
     Fraud—and further subdivided by the seven deadly sins.  In
     Purgatory, penance is ordered on the basis of three types of
     natural love.  Paradise is organized on the basis of three types
     of Divine Love, and further subdivided according to the three
     theological and four cardinal virtues.
        (Thomas Schumacher, "The Danteum,"
         Princeton Architectural Press, 1993)</p>
<p id="id04997">By translating the structure, Terragni could then layer the literal and the
spiritual meanings of the Poem without allowing either to dominate.  These
layers of meaning are native to the Divine Comedy as they are native to
much medieval literature, although modern readers and tourists may not be
so familiar with them.  They are literal, allegorical, moral, and
anagogical.  I offer you St. Thomas of Aquinas' definition of these last
three as they relate to Sacred Scripture:</p>
<p id="id04998" style="margin-left: 6%; margin-right: 6%">     . . .this spiritual sense has a threefold division. . .so far as
     the things of the Old Law signify the things of the New Law,
     there is the allegorical sense; so far as the things done in
     Christ, or so far as the things which signify Christ, are types
     of what we ought to do, there is the moral sense.  But so far as
     they signify what relates to eternal glory, there is the
     anagogical sense.    (Summa Theologica I, 1, 10)</p>
<p id="id04999">Within the Danteum the Poet's meanings lurk in solid form.  An example: the
Danteum design does have spaces literally associated with the Comedy—the
Dark Wood of Error, Inferno, Purgatorio, and the Paradiso—but these spaces
also relate among themselves spiritually.  Dante often highlights a virtue
by first condemning its corruption.  Within Dante's system Justice is the
greatest of the cardinal virtues; its corruption, Fraud, is the most
contemptible of vices.  Because Dante saw the papacy as the most precious of
sacred institutions, corrupt popes figure prominently among the damned in
the Poet's Inferno.  In the Danteum the materiality of the worldly Dark Wood
directly opposes the transcendence of the Paradiso.  In the realm of error
every thought is lost and secular, while in heaven every soul's intent is
directed toward God.  The shadowy Inferno of the Danteum mirrors the
Purgatorio's illuminated ascent to heaven.  Purgatory embodies hope and
growth where hell chases its own dark inertia.  Such is the cosmography
shared by Terragni and Dante.</p>
<p id="id05000">In this postscript I intend neither to fully examine the meaning nor the
plan of the Danteum, but rather to evince the power that art has acted as a
catalyst to other artists.  The Danteum, a modern design inspired by a
medieval poem, is but one example.  Dante's poem is filled with characters
epitomizing the full range of vices and virtues of human personalities.
Dante's characters come from his present and literature's past; they are
mythological, biblical, classical, ancient, and medieval.  They, rather than
Calliope and her sisters, were Dante's muses.</p>
<p id="id05001">'La Divina Commedia' seems a natural candidate to complete Project
Gutenberg's first milleditio and to begin its second thousand e-texts.
Although distinctly medieval, its continuum of influence spans the
Renaissance and modernity.  Terragni saw his place within the Comedy as
surely as Dante saw his own.  We too fit within Dante's understanding of the
human condition; we differ less from our past than we might like to
believe.  T. S. Eliot understood this when he wrote "Dante and Shakespeare
divide the modern world between them, there is no third."  So now Dante
joins Shakespeare (e-text #100) in the Project Gutenberg collection.  Two
works that influenced Dante are also part of the collection: The Bible
(#10) and Virgil's Aeneid (#227).  Other major influences—St. Thomas of
Aquinas' Summa Theologica, The Metamorphoses of Ovid, and Aristotle's
Nicomachean Ethics—are available in electronic form at other Internet
sites.  If one searches enough he may even find a computer rendering of the
Danteum on the Internet.  By presenting this electronic text to Project
Gutenberg it is my hope that in will not rest in a computer unknown and
unread; it is my hope that artists will see themselves in the Divine Comedy
and be inspired, just as Dante ran the paths left by Virgil and St. Thomas
that led him to the stars.</p>
<p id="id05002">Dennis McCarthy, July 1997
Atlanta, Georgia USA
imprimatur@juno.com</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
