<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Inferno</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="inferno" epub:type="volume">
			<section id="inferno-preface" epub:type="preface z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>Oft have I seen at some cathedral door</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A laborer, pausing in the dust and heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lay down his burden, and with reverent feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enter, and cross himself, and on the floor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kneel to repeat his paternoster o’er;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far off the noises of the world retreat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The loud vociferations of the street</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Become an undistinguishable roar.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, as I enter here from day to day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And leave my burden at this minster gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kneeling in prayer, and not ashamed to pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tumult of the time disconsolate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To inarticulate murmurs dies away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While the eternal ages watch and wait.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How strange the sculptures that adorn these towers!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This crowd of statues, in whose folded sleeves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Birds build their nests; while canopied with leaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Parvis and portal bloom like trellised bowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the vast minster seems a cross of flowers!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fiends and dragons on the gargoyled eaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Watch the dead Christ between the living thieves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, underneath, the traitor Judas lowers!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! from what agonies of heart and brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What exultations trampling on despair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What tenderness, what tears, what hate of wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What passionate outcry of a soul in pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uprose this poem of the earth and air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This medieval miracle of song!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<h2 epub:type="title">Inferno</h2>
			<section id="inferno-canto-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Dark Forest⁠—The Hill of Difficulty⁠—The Panther, the Lion, and the Wolf⁠—Virgil.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Midway upon the journey of our life<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I found myself within a forest dark,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the straightforward pathway had been lost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah me! how hard a thing it is to say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What was this forest savage, rough, and stern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in the very thought renews the fear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So bitter is it, death is little more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of the good to treat, which there I found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Speak will I of the other things I saw there.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot well repeat how there I entered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So full was I of slumber at the moment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which I had abandoned the true way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But after I had reached a mountain’s foot,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At that point where the valley terminated,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which had with consternation pierced my heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upward I looked, and I beheld its shoulders,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vested already with that planet’s rays<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which leadeth others right by every road.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then was the fear a little quieted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in my heart’s lake had endured throughout<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The night, which I had passed so piteously.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even as he, who, with distressful breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth issued from the sea upon the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turns to the water perilous and gazes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So did my soul, that still was fleeing onward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turn itself back to re-behold the pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which never yet a living person left.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>After my weary body I had rested,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The way resumed I on the desert slope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the firm foot ever was the lower.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo! almost where the ascent began,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A panther light and swift exceedingly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with a spotted skin was covered o’er!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never moved she from before my face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nay, rather did impede so much my way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That many times I to return had turned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The time was the beginning of the morning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And up the sun was mounting with those stars</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with him were, what time the Love Divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At first in motion set those beauteous things;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So were to me occasion of good hope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The variegated skin of that wild beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hour of time, and the delicious season;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not so much, that did not give me fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A lion’s aspect which appeared to me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He seemed as if against me he were coming</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With head uplifted, and with ravenous hunger,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that it seemed the air was afraid of him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a she-wolf, that with all hungerings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemed to be laden in her meagreness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many folk has caused to live forlorn!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She brought upon me so much heaviness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the affright that from her aspect came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I the hope relinquished of the height.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as he is who willingly acquires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the time comes that causes him to lose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who weeps in all his thoughts and is despondent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’en such made me that beast withouten peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, coming on against me by degrees</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrust me back thither where the sun is silent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While I was rushing downward to the lowland,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before mine eyes did one present himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who seemed from long-continued silence hoarse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I beheld him in the desert vast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Have pity on me,” unto him I cried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Whiche’er thou art, or shade or real man!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He answered me: “Not man; man once I was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both my parents were of Lombardy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Mantuans by country both of them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Sub Julio</i> was I born, though it was late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lived at Rome under the good Augustus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">During the time of false and lying gods.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A poet was I, and I sang that just</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Son of Anchises, who came forth from Troy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After that Ilion the superb was burned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou, why goest thou back to such annoyance?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why climb’st thou not the Mount Delectable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is the source and cause of every joy?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now, art thou that Virgilius and that fountain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which spreads abroad so wide a river of speech?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I made response to him with bashful forehead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O, of the other poets honour and light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Avail me the long study and great love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That have impelled me to explore thy volume!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art my master, and my author thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou art alone the one from whom I took</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The beautiful style that has done honour to me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold the beast, for which I have turned back;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do thou protect me from her, famous Sage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she doth make my veins and pulses tremble.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thee it behoves to take another road,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Responded he, when he beheld me weeping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“If from this savage place thou wouldst escape;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because this beast, at which thou criest out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suffers not any one to pass her way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But so doth harass him, that she destroys him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And has a nature so malign and ruthless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never doth she glut her greedy will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after food is hungrier than before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many the animals with whom she weds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more they shall be still, until the Greyhound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Comes, who shall make her perish in her pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shall not feed on either earth or pelf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But upon wisdom, and on love and virtue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twixt Feltro and Feltro shall his nation be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that low Italy shall he be the saviour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On whose account the maid Camilla died,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Euryalus, Turnus, Nisus, of their wounds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through every city shall he hunt her down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until he shall have driven her back to Hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There from whence envy first did let her loose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore I think and judge it for thy best</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou follow me, and I will be thy guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lead thee hence through the eternal place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where thou shalt hear the desperate lamentations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shalt see the ancient spirits disconsolate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who cry out each one for the second death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou shalt see those who contented are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within the fire, because they hope to come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whene’er it may be, to the blessed people;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom, then, if thou wishest to ascend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A soul shall be for that than I more worthy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With her at my departure I will leave thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because that Emperor, who reigns above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that I was rebellious to his law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wills that through me none come into his city.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He governs everywhere, and there he reigns;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There is his city and his lofty throne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O happy he whom thereto he elects!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I to him: “Poet, I thee entreat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By that same God whom thou didst never know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that I may escape this woe and worse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wouldst conduct me there where thou hast said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I may see the portal of Saint Peter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And those thou makest so disconsolate.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he moved on, and I behind him followed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Dante’s Protest and Virgil’s Appeal⁠—The Intercession of the Three Ladies Benedight.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Day was departing, and the embrowned air</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Released the animals that are on earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From their fatigues; and I the only one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made myself ready to sustain the war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both of the way and likewise of the woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which memory that errs not shall retrace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Muses, O high genius, now assist me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O memory, that didst write down what I saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here thy nobility shall be manifest!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I began: “Poet, who guidest me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Regard my manhood, if it be sufficient,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere to the arduous pass thou dost confide me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou sayest, that of Silvius the parent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While yet corruptible, unto the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Immortal went, and was there bodily.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if the adversary of all evil</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was courteous, thinking of the high effect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That issue would from him, and who, and what,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To men of intellect unmeet it seems not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he was of great Rome, and of her empire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the empyreal heaven as father chosen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which and what, wishing to speak the truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were stablished as the holy place, wherein</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sits the successor of the greatest Peter.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon this journey, whence thou givest him vaunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Things did he hear, which the occasion were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both of his victory and the papal mantle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thither went afterwards the Chosen Vessel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bring back comfort thence unto that Faith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of salvation’s way is the beginning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I, why thither come, or who concedes it?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I not Aeneas am, I am not Paul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor I, nor others, think me worthy of it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore, if I resign myself to come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I fear the coming may be ill-advised;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou’rt wise, and knowest better than I speak.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as he is, who unwills what he willed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by new thoughts doth his intention change,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that from his design he quite withdraws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such I became, upon that dark hillside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because, in thinking, I consumed the emprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was so very prompt in the beginning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If I have well thy language understood,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Replied that shade of the Magnanimous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Thy soul attainted is with cowardice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which many times a man encumbers so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It turns him back from honoured enterprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As false sight doth a beast, when he is shy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou mayst free thee from this apprehension,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’ll tell thee why I came, and what I heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At the first moment when I grieved for thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among those was I who are in suspense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a fair, saintly Lady called to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In such wise, I besought her to command me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her eyes where shining brighter than the Star;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she began to say, gentle and low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With voice angelical, in her own language:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘O spirit courteous of Mantua,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom the fame still in the world endures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shall endure, long-lasting as the world;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A friend of mine, and not the friend of fortune,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the desert slope is so impeded</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his way, that he has turned through terror,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And may, I fear, already be so lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I too late have risen to his succour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that which I have heard of him in Heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bestir thee now, and with thy speech ornate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with what needful is for his release,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Assist him so, that I may be consoled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beatrice am I, who do bid thee go;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I come from there, where I would fain return;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love moved me, which compelleth me to speak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I shall be in presence of my Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full often will I praise thee unto him.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then paused she, and thereafter I began:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘O Lady of virtue, thou alone through whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The human race exceedeth all contained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within the heaven that has the lesser circles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So grateful unto me is thy commandment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To obey, if ’twere already done, were late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No farther need’st thou ope to me thy wish.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the cause tell me why thou dost not shun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The here descending down into this centre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the vast place thou burnest to return to.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Since thou wouldst fain so inwardly discern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Briefly will I relate,’ she answered me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">‘Why I am not afraid to enter here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of those things only should one be afraid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which have the power of doing others harm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the rest, no; because they are not fearful.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God in his mercy such created me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That misery of yours attains me not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor any flame assails me of this burning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gentle Lady is in Heaven, who grieves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At this impediment, to which I send thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that stern judgment there above is broken.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In her entreaty she besought Lucia,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said, “Thy faithful one now stands in need</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of thee, and unto thee I recommend him.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lucia, foe of all that cruel is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hastened away, and came unto the place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where I was sitting with the ancient Rachel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Beatrice” said she, “the true praise of God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why succourest thou not him, who loved thee so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thee he issued from the vulgar herd?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dost thou not hear the pity of his plaint?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dost thou not see the death that combats him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beside that flood, where ocean has no vaunt?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never were persons in the world so swift</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To work their weal and to escape their woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I, after such words as these were uttered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came hither downward from my blessed seat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Confiding in thy dignified discourse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which honours thee, and those who’ve listened to it.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After she thus had spoken unto me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weeping, her shining eyes she turned away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby she made me swifter in my coming;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unto thee I came, as she desired;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have delivered thee from that wild beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which barred the beautiful mountain’s short ascent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What is it, then? Why, why dost thou delay?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why is such baseness bedded in thy heart?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Daring and hardihood why hast thou not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeing that three such Ladies benedight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are caring for thee in the court of Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so much good my speech doth promise thee?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as the flowerets, by nocturnal chill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bowed down and closed, when the sun whitens them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uplift themselves all open on their stems;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such I became with my exhausted strength,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And such good courage to my heart there coursed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I began, like an intrepid person:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O she compassionate, who succoured me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And courteous thou, who hast obeyed so soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The words of truth which she addressed to thee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast my heart so with desire disposed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the adventure, with these words of thine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to my first intent I have returned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now go, for one sole will is in us both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou Leader, and thou Lord, and Master thou.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus said I to him; and when he had moved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I entered on the deep and savage way.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-3" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Gate of Hell⁠—The Inefficient or Indifferent⁠—Pope Celestine <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>⁠—The Shores of Acheron⁠—Charon⁠—The Earthquake and the Swoon.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Through me the way is to the city dolent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through me the way is to eternal dole;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through me the way among the people lost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Justice incited my sublime Creator;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Created me divine Omnipotence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The highest Wisdom and the primal Love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before me there were no created things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Only eterne, and I eternal last.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All hope abandon, ye who enter in!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These words in sombre colour I beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Written upon the summit of a gate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence I: “Their sense is, Master, hard to me!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me, as one experienced:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Here all suspicion needs must be abandoned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All cowardice must needs be here extinct.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We to the place have come, where I have told thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou shalt behold the people dolorous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who have foregone the good of intellect.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after he had laid his hand on mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With joyful mien, whence I was comforted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He led me in among the secret things.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There sighs, complaints, and ululations loud</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Resounded through the air without a star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence I, at the beginning, wept thereat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Languages diverse, horrible dialects,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Accents of anger, words of agony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And voices high and hoarse, with sound of hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made up a tumult that goes whirling on</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forever in that air forever black,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as the sand doth, when the whirlwind breathes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, who had my head with horror bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said: “Master, what is this which now I hear?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What folk is this, which seems by pain so vanquished?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “This miserable mode</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Maintain the melancholy souls of those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who lived withouten infamy or praise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Commingled are they with that caitiff choir</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Angels, who have not rebellious been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor faithful were to God, but were for self.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heavens expelled them, not to be less fair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor them the nethermore abyss receives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For glory none the damned would have from them.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I: “O Master, what so grievous is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To these, that maketh them lament so sore?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He answered: “I will tell thee very briefly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These have no longer any hope of death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this blind life of theirs is so debased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They envious are of every other fate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No fame of them the world permits to be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Misericord and Justice both disdain them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let us not speak of them, but look, and pass.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, who looked again, beheld a banner,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, whirling round, ran on so rapidly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of all pause it seemed to me indignant;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after it there came so long a train</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of people, that I ne’er would have believed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever Death so many had undone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When some among them I had recognised,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I looked, and I beheld the shade of him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who made through cowardice the great refusal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forthwith I comprehended, and was certain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That this the sect was of the caitiff wretches</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hateful to God and to his enemies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These miscreants, who never were alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were naked, and were stung exceedingly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By gadflies and by hornets that were there.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These did their faces irrigate with blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, with their tears commingled, at their feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the disgusting worms was gathered up.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when to gazing farther I betook me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">People I saw on a great river’s bank;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence said I: “Master, now vouchsafe to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I may know who these are, and what law</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Makes them appear so ready to pass over,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I discern athwart the dusky light.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “These things shall all be known</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thee, as soon as we our footsteps stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the dismal shore of Acheron.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with mine eyes ashamed and downward cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fearing my words might irksome be to him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From speech refrained I till we reached the river.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo! towards us coming in a boat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An old man, hoary with the hair of eld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crying: “Woe unto you, ye souls depraved!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hope nevermore to look upon the heavens;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I come to lead you to the other shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the eternal shades in heat and frost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou, that yonder standest, living soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withdraw thee from these people, who are dead!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when he saw that I did not withdraw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said: “By other ways, by other ports</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou to the shore shalt come, not here, for passage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A lighter vessel needs must carry thee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unto him the Guide: “Vex thee not, Charon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is so willed there where is power to do</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That which is willed; and farther question not.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereat were quieted the fleecy cheeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of him the ferryman of the livid fen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who round about his eyes had wheels of flame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all those souls who weary were and naked</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their colour changed and gnashed their teeth together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As soon as they had heard those cruel words.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God they blasphemed and their progenitors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The human race, the place, the time, the seed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of their engendering and of their birth!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereafter all together they drew back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bitterly weeping, to the accursed shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which waiteth every man who fears not God.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charon the demon, with the eyes of glede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beckoning to them, collects them all together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beats with his oar whoever lags behind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in the autumn-time the leaves fall off,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First one and then another, till the branch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the earth surrenders all its spoils;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In similar wise the evil seed of Adam</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throw themselves from that margin one by one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At signals, as a bird unto its lure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So they depart across the dusky wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ere upon the other side they land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Again on this side a new troop assembles.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My son,” the courteous Master said to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“All those who perish in the wrath of God</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here meet together out of every land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ready are they to pass o’er the river,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because celestial Justice spurs them on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that their fear is turned into desire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This way there never passes a good soul;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hence if Charon doth complain of thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well mayst thou know now what his speech imports.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This being finished, all the dusk champaign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trembled so violently, that of that terror</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The recollection bathes me still with sweat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The land of tears gave forth a blast of wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fulminated a vermilion light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which overmastered in me every sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as a man whom sleep hath seized I fell.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-4" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The First Circle⁠—Limbo, or the Border Land of the Unbaptized⁠—The Four Poets, Homer, Horace, Ovid, and Lucan⁠—The Noble Castle of Philosophy.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Broke the deep lethargy within my head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A heavy thunder, so that I upstarted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to a person who by force is wakened;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And round about I moved my rested eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uprisen erect, and steadfastly I gazed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To recognise the place wherein I was.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>True is it, that upon the verge I found me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the abysmal valley dolorous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That gathers thunder of infinite ululations.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Obscure, profound it was, and nebulous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that by fixing on its depths my sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nothing whatever I discerned therein.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Let us descend now into the blind world,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began the Poet, pallid utterly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“I will be first, and thou shalt second be.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, who of his colour was aware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said: “How shall I come, if thou art afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who’rt wont to be a comfort to my fears?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “The anguish of the people</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who are below here in my face depicts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That pity which for terror thou hast taken.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us go on, for the long way impels us.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus he went in, and thus he made me enter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The foremost circle that surrounds the abyss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, as it seemed to me from listening,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were lamentations none, but only sighs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That tremble made the everlasting air.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this arose from sorrow without torment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which the crowds had, that many were and great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of infants and of women and of men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me the Master good: “Thou dost not ask</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What spirits these, which thou beholdest, are?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now will I have thee know, ere thou go farther,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they sinned not; and if they merit had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis not enough, because they had not baptism</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is the portal of the Faith thou holdest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if they were before Christianity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the right manner they adored not God;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And among such as these am I myself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For such defects, and not for other guilt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lost are we and are only so far punished,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That without hope we live on in desire.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great grief seized on my heart when this I heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because some people of much worthiness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I knew, who in that Limbo were suspended.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Tell me, my Master, tell me, thou my Lord,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began I, with desire of being certain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that Faith which o’ercometh every error,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Came any one by his own merit hence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or by another’s, who was blessed thereafter?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he, who understood my covert speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Replied: “I was a novice in this state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I saw hither come a Mighty One,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sign of victory incoronate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence he drew forth the shade of the First Parent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that of his son Abel, and of Noah,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Moses the lawgiver, and the obedient</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abraham, patriarch, and David, king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Israel with his father and his children,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Rachel, for whose sake he did so much,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And others many, and he made them blessed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thou must know, that earlier than these</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Never were any human spirits saved.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We ceased not to advance because he spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But still were passing onward through the forest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The forest, say I, of thick-crowded ghosts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not very far as yet our way had gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This side the summit, when I saw a fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That overcame a hemisphere of darkness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We were a little distant from it still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not so far that I in part discerned not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That honourable people held that place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O thou who honourest every art and science,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who may these be, which such great honour have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from the fashion of the rest it parts them?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “The honourable name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sounds of them above there in thy life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wins grace in Heaven, that so advances them.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the meantime a voice was heard by me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“All honour be to the preeminent Poet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His shade returns again, that was departed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the voice had ceased and quiet was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Four mighty shades I saw approaching us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Semblance had they nor sorrowful nor glad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To say to me began my gracious Master:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Him with that falchion in his hand behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who comes before the three, even as their lord.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That one is Homer, Poet sovereign;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He who comes next is Horace, the satirist;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The third is Ovid, and the last is Lucan.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because to each of these with me applies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The name that solitary voice proclaimed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They do me honour, and in that do well.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus I beheld assemble the fair school</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that lord of the song preeminent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who o’er the others like an eagle soars.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they together had discoursed somewhat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They turned to me with signs of salutation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on beholding this, my Master smiled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And more of honour still, much more, they did me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that they made me one of their own band;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the sixth was I, ’mid so much wit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus we went on as far as to the light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Things saying ’tis becoming to keep silent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As was the saying of them where I was.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We came unto a noble castle’s foot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seven times encompassed with lofty walls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defended round by a fair rivulet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This we passed over even as firm ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through portals seven I entered with these Sages;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We came into a meadow of fresh verdure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>People were there with solemn eyes and slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of great authority in their countenance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They spake but seldom, and with gentle voices.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus we withdrew ourselves upon one side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into an opening luminous and lofty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that they all of them were visible.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There opposite, upon the green enamel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were pointed out to me the mighty spirits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom to have seen I feel myself exalted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw Electra with companions many,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Mongst whom I knew both Hector and Aeneas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Caesar in armour with gerfalcon eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw Camilla and Penthesilea</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the other side, and saw the King Latinus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with Lavinia his daughter sat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw that Brutus who drove Tarquin forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lucretia, Julia, Marcia, and Cornelia,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw alone, apart, the Saladin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I had lifted up my brows a little,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Master I beheld of those who know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sit with his philosophic family.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All gaze upon him, and all do him honour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There I beheld both Socrates and Plato,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who nearer him before the others stand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Democritus, who puts the world on chance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Diogenes, Anaxagoras, and Thales,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Zeno, Empedocles, and Heraclitus;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of qualities I saw the good collector,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hight Dioscorides; and Orpheus saw I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tully and Livy, and moral Seneca,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Euclid, geometrician, and Ptolemy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Galen, Hippocrates, and Avicenna,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Averroes, who the great Comment made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot all of them pourtray in full,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because so drives me onward the long theme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That many times the word comes short of fact.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sixfold company in two divides;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another way my sapient Guide conducts me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth from the quiet to the air that trembles;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to a place I come where nothing shines.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-5" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Second Circle⁠—Minos⁠—The Wanton⁠—The Infernal Hurricane⁠—Francesca da Rimini.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus I descended out of the first circle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down to the second, that less space begirds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so much greater dole, that goads to wailing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There standeth Minos horribly, and snarls;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Examines the transgressions at the entrance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Judges, and sends according as he girds him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say, that when the spirit evil-born</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cometh before him, wholly it confesses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this discriminator of transgressions</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeth what place in Hell is meet for it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Girds himself with his tail as many times</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As grades he wishes it should be thrust down.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Always before him many of them stand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They go by turns each one unto the judgment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They speak, and hear, and then are downward hurled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O thou, that to this dolorous hostelry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Comest,” said Minos to me, when he saw me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leaving the practice of so great an office,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Look how thou enterest, and in whom thou trustest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let not the portal’s amplitude deceive thee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto him my Guide: “Why criest thou too?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do not impede his journey fate-ordained;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is so willed there where is power to do</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That which is willed; and ask no further question.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now begin the dolesome notes to grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Audible unto me; now am I come</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where much lamentation strikes upon me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I came into a place mute of all light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which bellows as the sea does in a tempest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If by opposing winds ’tis combated.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The infernal hurricane that never rests</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hurtles the spirits onward in its rapine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whirling them round, and smiting, it molests them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they arrive before the precipice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There are the shrieks, the plaints, and the laments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There they blaspheme the puissance divine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I understood that unto such a torment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The carnal malefactors were condemned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who reason subjugate to appetite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as the wings of starlings bear them on</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the cold season in large band and full,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So doth that blast the spirits maledict;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It hither, thither, downward, upward, drives them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No hope doth comfort them for evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not of repose, but even of lesser pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as the cranes go chanting forth their lays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Making in air a long line of themselves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So saw I coming, uttering lamentations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shadows borne onward by the aforesaid stress.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereupon said I: “Master, who are those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">People, whom the black air so castigates?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The first of those, of whom intelligence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou fain wouldst have,” then said he unto me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“The empress was of many languages.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sensual vices she was so abandoned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lustful she made licit in her law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To remove the blame to which she had been led.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She is Semiramis, of whom we read</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she succeeded Ninus, and was his spouse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She held the land which now the Sultan rules.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The next is she who killed herself for love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And broke faith with the ashes of Sichaeus;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Cleopatra the voluptuous.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Helen I saw, for whom so many ruthless</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seasons revolved; and saw the great Achilles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who at the last hour combated with Love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paris I saw, Tristan; and more than a thousand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shades did he name and point out with his finger,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom Love had separated from our life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After that I had listened to my Teacher,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Naming the dames of eld and cavaliers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pity prevailed, and I was nigh bewildered.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I began: “O Poet, willingly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Speak would I to those two, who go together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seem upon the wind to be so light.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, he to me: “Thou’lt mark, when they shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nearer to us; and then do thou implore them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By love which leadeth them, and they will come.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon as the wind in our direction sways them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My voice uplift I: “O ye weary souls!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come speak to us, if no one interdicts it.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As turtledoves, called onward by desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With open and steady wings to the sweet nest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fly through the air by their volition borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So came they from the band where Dido is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approaching us athwart the air malign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So strong was the affectionate appeal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O living creature gracious and benignant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who visiting goest through the purple air</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Us, who have stained the world incarnadine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If were the King of the Universe our friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We would pray unto him to give thee peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since thou hast pity on our woe perverse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of what it pleases thee to hear and speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That will we hear, and we will speak to you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While silent is the wind, as it is now.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sitteth the city, wherein I was born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the seashore where the Po descends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rest in peace with all his retinue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love, that on gentle heart doth swiftly seize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seized this man for the person beautiful</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was ta’en from me, and still the mode offends me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love, that exempts no one beloved from loving,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seized me with pleasure of this man so strongly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, as thou seest, it doth not yet desert me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love has conducted us unto one death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Caina waiteth him who quenched our life!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These words were borne along from them to us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as I had heard those souls tormented,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I bowed my face, and so long held it down</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until the Poet said to me: “What thinkest?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I made answer, I began: “Alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How many pleasant thoughts, how much desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Conducted these unto the dolorous pass!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then unto them I turned me, and I spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I began: “Thine agonies, Francesca,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad and compassionate to weeping make me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But tell me, at the time of those sweet sighs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By what and in what manner Love conceded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That you should know your dubious desires?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she to me: “There is no greater sorrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than to be mindful of the happy time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In misery, and that thy Teacher knows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, if to recognise the earliest root</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of love in us thou hast so great desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will do even as he who weeps and speaks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One day we reading were for our delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Launcelot, how Love did him enthral.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alone we were and without any fear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full many a time our eyes together drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That reading, and drove the colour from our faces;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But one point only was it that o’ercame us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When as we read of the much-longed-for smile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being by such a noble lover kissed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This one, who ne’er from me shall be divided,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kissed me upon the mouth all palpitating.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Galeotto was the book and he who wrote it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That day no farther did we read therein.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the while one spirit uttered this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other one did weep so, that, for pity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I swooned away as if I had been dying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fell, even as a dead body falls.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-6" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Third Circle⁠—Cerberus⁠—The Gluttonous⁠—The Eternal Rain⁠—Ciacco.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At the return of consciousness, that closed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before the pity of those two relations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which utterly with sadness had confused me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New torments I behold, and new tormented</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Around me, whichsoever way I move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whichsoever way I turn, and gaze.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the third circle am I of the rain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eternal, maledict, and cold, and heavy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its law and quality are never new.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Huge hail, and water sombre-hued, and snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Athwart the tenebrous air pour down amain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Noisome the earth is, that receiveth this.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cerberus, monster cruel and uncouth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his three gullets like a dog is barking</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the people that are there submerged.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Red eyes he has, and unctuous beard and black,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And belly large, and armed with claws his hands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He rends the spirits, flays, and quarters them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Howl the rain maketh them like unto dogs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One side they make a shelter for the other;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft turn themselves the wretched reprobates.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Cerberus perceived us, the great worm!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mouths he opened, and displayed his tusks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not a limb had he that was motionless.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my Conductor, with his spans extended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Took of the earth, and with his fists well filled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He threw it into those rapacious gullets.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as that dog is, who by barking craves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And quiet grows soon as his food he gnaws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to devour it he but thinks and struggles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The like became those muzzles filth-begrimed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Cerberus the demon, who so thunders</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the souls that they would fain be deaf.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We passed across the shadows, which subdues</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heavy rainstorm, and we placed our feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon their vanity that person seems.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They all were lying prone upon the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Excepting one, who sat upright as soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he beheld us passing on before him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O thou that art conducted through this Hell,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He said to me, “recall me, if thou canst;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thyself wast made before I was unmade.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I to him: “The anguish which thou hast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps doth draw thee out of my remembrance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that it seems not I have ever seen thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But tell me who thou art, that in so doleful</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A place art put, and in such punishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If some are greater, none is so displeasing.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “Thy city, which is full</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of envy so that now the sack runs over,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Held me within it in the life serene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You citizens were wont to call me Ciacco;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the pernicious sin of gluttony</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I, as thou seest, am battered by this rain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, sad soul, am not the only one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all these suffer the like penalty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the like sin;” and word no more spake he.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I answered him: “Ciacco, thy wretchedness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weighs on me so that it to weep invites me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But tell me, if thou knowest, to what shall come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The citizens of the divided city;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If any there be just; and the occasion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell me why so much discord has assailed it.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “They, after long contention,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will come to bloodshed; and the rustic party</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will drive the other out with much offence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then afterwards behoves it this one fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within three suns, and rise again the other</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By force of him who now is on the coast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High will it hold its forehead a long while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Keeping the other under heavy burdens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Howe’er it weeps thereat and is indignant.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The just are two, and are not understood there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Envy and Arrogance and Avarice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are the three sparks that have all hearts enkindled.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here ended he his tearful utterance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I to him: “I wish thee still to teach me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make a gift to me of further speech.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Farinata and Tegghiaio, once so worthy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Jacopo Rusticucci, Arrigo, and Mosca,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And others who on good deeds set their thoughts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say where they are, and cause that I may know them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For great desire constraineth me to learn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If Heaven doth sweeten them, or Hell envenom.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he: “They are among the blacker souls;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A different sin downweighs them to the bottom;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thou so far descendest, thou canst see them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when thou art again in the sweet world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I pray thee to the mind of others bring me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No more I tell thee and no more I answer.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then his straightforward eyes he turned askance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eyed me a little, and then bowed his head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He fell therewith prone like the other blind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Guide said to me: “He wakes no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This side the sound of the angelic trumpet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When shall approach the hostile Potentate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each one shall find again his dismal tomb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall reassume his flesh and his own figure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall hear what through eternity reechoes.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So we passed onward o’er the filthy mixture</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of shadows and of rain with footsteps slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Touching a little on the future life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore I said: “Master, these torments here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will they increase after the mighty sentence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or lesser be, or will they be as burning?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “Return unto thy science,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which wills, that as the thing more perfect is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more it feels of pleasure and of pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Albeit that this people maledict</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To true perfection never can attain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hereafter more than now they look to be.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round in a circle by that road we went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Speaking much more, which I do not repeat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We came unto the point where the descent is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There we found Plutus the great enemy.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-7" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Fourth Circle⁠—Plutus⁠—The Avaricious and the Prodigal⁠—Fortune and her Wheel⁠—The Fifth Circle⁠—Styx⁠—The Irascible and the Sullen.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Pape Satan, Pape Satan, Aleppe!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus Plutus with his clucking voice began;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that benignant Sage, who all things knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said, to encourage me: “Let not thy fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Harm thee; for any power that he may have</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall not prevent thy going down this crag.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he turned round unto that bloated lip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said: “Be silent, thou accursed wolf;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Consume within thyself with thine own rage.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not causeless is this journey to the abyss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus is it willed on high, where Michael wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vengeance upon the proud adultery.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as the sails inflated by the wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Involved together fall when snaps the mast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fell the cruel monster to the earth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus we descended into the fourth chasm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gaining still farther on the dolesome shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which all the woe of the universe insacks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Justice of God, ah! who heaps up so many</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">New toils and sufferings as I beheld?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And why doth our transgression waste us so?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As doth the billow there upon Charybdis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That breaks itself on that which it encounters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So here the folk must dance their roundelay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here saw I people, more than elsewhere, many,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On one side and the other, with great howls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rolling weights forward by main force of chest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They clashed together, and then at that point</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each one turned backward, rolling retrograde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crying, “Why keepest?” and, “Why squanderest thou?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus they returned along the lurid circle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On either hand unto the opposite point,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shouting their shameful metre evermore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then each, when he arrived there, wheeled about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through his half-circle to another joust;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I, who had my heart pierced as it were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exclaimed: “My Master, now declare to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What people these are, and if all were clerks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These shaven crowns upon the left of us.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “All of them were asquint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In intellect in the first life, so much</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That there with measure they no spending made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clearly enough their voices bark it forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whene’er they reach the two points of the circle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where sunders them the opposite defect.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clerks those were who no hairy covering</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have on the head, and Popes and Cardinals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whom doth Avarice practise its excess.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I: “My Master, among such as these</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I ought forsooth to recognise some few,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who were infected with these maladies.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “Vain thought thou entertainest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The undiscerning life which made them sordid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now makes them unto all discernment dim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forever shall they come to these two buttings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These from the sepulchre shall rise again</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the fist closed, and these with tresses shorn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ill giving and ill keeping the fair world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have ta’en from them, and placed them in this scuffle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whate’er it be, no words adorn I for it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now canst thou, Son, behold the transient farce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of goods that are committed unto Fortune,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which the human race each other buffet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all the gold that is beneath the moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ever has been, of these weary souls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could never make a single one repose.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Master,” I said to him, “now tell me also</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What is this Fortune which thou speakest of,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That has the world’s goods so within its clutches?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “O creatures imbecile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What ignorance is this which doth beset you?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now will I have thee learn my judgment of her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He whose omniscience everything transcends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heavens created, and gave who should guide them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every part to every part may shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Distributing the light in equal measure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He in like manner to the mundane splendours</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ordained a general ministress and guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she might change at times the empty treasures</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From race to race, from one blood to another,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beyond resistance of all human wisdom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore one people triumphs, and another</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Languishes, in pursuance of her judgment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which hidden is, as in the grass a serpent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your knowledge has no counterstand against her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She makes provision, judges, and pursues</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her governance, as theirs the other gods.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her permutations have not any truce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Necessity makes her precipitate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So often cometh who his turn obtains.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this is she who is so crucified</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even by those who ought to give her praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Giving her blame amiss, and bad repute.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But she is blissful, and she hears it not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among the other primal creatures gladsome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She turns her sphere, and blissful she rejoices.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us descend now unto greater woe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Already sinks each star that was ascending</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I set out, and loitering is forbidden.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We crossed the circle to the other bank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Near to a fount that boils, and pours itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along a gully that runs out of it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The water was more sombre far than perse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And we, in company with the dusky waves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made entrance downward by a path uncouth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A marsh it makes, which has the name of Styx,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This tristful brooklet, when it has descended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down to the foot of the malign gray shores.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, who stood intent upon beholding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saw people mud-besprent in that lagoon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All of them naked and with angry look.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They smote each other not alone with hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with the head and with the breast and feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tearing each other piecemeal with their teeth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said the good Master: “Son, thou now beholdest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The souls of those whom anger overcame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And likewise I would have thee know for certain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the water people are who sigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make this water bubble at the surface,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As the eye tells thee wheresoe’er it turns.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fixed in the mire they say, ‘We sullen were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the sweet air, which by the sun is gladdened,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bearing within ourselves the sluggish reek;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now we are sullen in this sable mire.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This hymn do they keep gurgling in their throats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For with unbroken words they cannot say it.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus we went circling round the filthy fen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A great arc ’twixt the dry bank and the swamp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With eyes turned unto those who gorge the mire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the foot of a tower we came at last.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-8" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Phlegyas⁠—Philippe Argenti⁠—The Gate of the City of Dis.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I say, continuing, that long before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We to the foot of that high tower had come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our eyes went upward to the summit of it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By reason of two flamelets we saw placed there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from afar another answer them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So far, that hardly could the eye attain it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, to the sea of all discernment turned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I said: “What sayeth this, and what respondeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That other fire? and who are they that made it?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “Across the turbid waves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What is expected thou canst now discern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If reek of the morass conceal it not.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cord never shot an arrow from itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sped away athwart the air so swift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I beheld a very little boat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come o’er the water tow’rds us at that moment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the guidance of a single pilot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who shouted, “Now art thou arrived, fell soul?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Phlegyas, Phlegyas, thou criest out in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For this once,” said my Lord; “thou shalt not have us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Longer than in the passing of the slough.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he who listens to some great deceit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That has been done to him, and then resents it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such became Phlegyas, in his gathered wrath.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Guide descended down into the boat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then he made me enter after him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And only when I entered seemed it laden.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon as the Guide and I were in the boat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The antique prow goes on its way, dividing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More of the water than ’tis wont with others.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While we were running through the dead canal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uprose in front of me one full of mire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said, “Who ’rt thou that comest ere the hour?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I to him: “Although I come, I stay not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But who art thou that hast become so squalid?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Thou seest that I am one who weeps,” he answered.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I to him: “With weeping and with wailing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou spirit maledict, do thou remain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thee I know, though thou art all defiled.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then stretched he both his hands unto the boat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat my wary Master thrust him back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying, “Away there with the other dogs!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereafter with his arms he clasped my neck;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He kissed my face, and said: “Disdainful soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blessed be she who bore thee in her bosom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was an arrogant person in the world;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Goodness is none, that decks his memory;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So likewise here his shade is furious.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How many are esteemed great kings up there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who here shall be like unto swine in mire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leaving behind them horrible dispraises!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I: “My Master, much should I be pleased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If I could see him soused into this broth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before we issue forth out of the lake.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “Ere unto thee the shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reveal itself, thou shalt be satisfied;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such a desire ’tis meet thou shouldst enjoy.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little after that, I saw such havoc</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made of him by the people of the mire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That still I praise and thank my God for it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They all were shouting, “At Philippo Argenti!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that exasperate spirit Florentine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turned round upon himself with his own teeth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We left him there, and more of him I tell not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But on mine ears there smote a lamentation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence forward I intent unbar mine eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the good Master said: “Even now, my Son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The city draweth near whose name is Dis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the grave citizens, with the great throng.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I: “Its mosques already, Master, clearly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within there in the valley I discern</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vermilion, as if issuing from the fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They were.” And he to me: “The fire eternal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That kindles them within makes them look red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As thou beholdest in this nether Hell.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then we arrived within the moats profound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That circumvallate that disconsolate city;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The walls appeared to me to be of iron.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not without making first a circuit wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We came unto a place where loud the pilot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cried out to us, “Debark, here is the entrance.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than a thousand at the gates I saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the Heavens rained down, who angrily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were saying, “Who is this that without death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Goes through the kingdom of the people dead?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And my sagacious Master made a sign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wishing secretly to speak with them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little then they quelled their great disdain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said: “Come thou alone, and he begone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who has so boldly entered these dominions.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him return alone by his mad road;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Try, if he can; for thou shalt here remain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who hast escorted him through such dark regions.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Think, Reader, if I was discomforted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At utterance of the accursed words;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never to return here I believed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O my dear Guide, who more than seven times</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hast rendered me security, and drawn me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From imminent peril that before me stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do not desert me,” said I, “thus undone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if the going farther be denied us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let us retrace our steps together swiftly.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that Lord, who had led me thitherward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said unto me: “Fear not; because our passage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">None can take from us, it by Such is given.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But here await me, and thy weary spirit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Comfort and nourish with a better hope;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For in this nether world I will not leave thee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So onward goes and there abandons me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Father sweet, and I remain in doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For No and Yes within my head contend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I could not hear what he proposed to them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with them there he did not linger long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere each within in rivalry ran back.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They closed the portals, those our adversaries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On my Lord’s breast, who had remained without</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turned to me with footsteps far between.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eyes cast down, his forehead shorn had he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all its boldness, and he said, with sighs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Who has denied to me the dolesome houses?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unto me: “Thou, because I am angry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fear not, for I will conquer in the trial,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whatever for defence within be planned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This arrogance of theirs is nothing new;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For once they used it at less secret gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which finds itself without a fastening still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er it didst thou behold the dead inscription;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now this side of it descends the steep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Passing across the circles without escort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One by whose means the city shall be opened.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-9" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Furies⁠—The Angel⁠—The City of Dis⁠—The Sixth Circle⁠—Heresiarchs.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That hue which cowardice brought out on me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beholding my Conductor backward turn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sooner repressed within him his new colour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stopped attentive, like a man who listens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because the eye could not conduct him far</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the black air, and through the heavy fog.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Still it behoveth us to win the fight,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began he; “Else … Such offered us herself …</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O how I long that someone here arrive!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well I perceived, as soon as the beginning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He covered up with what came afterward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they were words quite different from the first;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But none the less his saying gave me fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because I carried out the broken phrase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps to a worse meaning than he had.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Into this bottom of the doleful conch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth any e’er descend from the first grade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which for its pain has only hope cut off?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This question put I; and he answered me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Seldom it comes to pass that one of us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Maketh the journey upon which I go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>True is it, once before I here below</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was conjured by that pitiless Erictho,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who summoned back the shades unto their bodies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Naked of me short while the flesh had been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before within that wall she made me enter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bring a spirit from the circle of Judas;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is the lowest region and the darkest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And farthest from the heaven which circles all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well know I the way; therefore be reassured.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This fen, which a prodigious stench exhales,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Encompasses about the city dolent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where now we cannot enter without anger.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And more he said, but not in mind I have it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because mine eye had altogether drawn me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tow’rds the high tower with the red-flaming summit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where in a moment saw I swift uprisen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The three infernal Furies stained with blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who had the limbs of women and their mien,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with the greenest hydras were begirt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Small serpents and cerastes were their tresses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith their horrid temples were entwined.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he who well the handmaids of the Queen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of everlasting lamentation knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said unto me: “Behold the fierce Erinnys.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is Megaera, on the left-hand side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She who is weeping on the right, Alecto;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tisiphone is between;” and then was silent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each one her breast was rending with her nails;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They beat them with their palms, and cried so loud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I for dread pressed close unto the Poet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Medusa come, so we to stone will change him!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All shouted looking down; “in evil hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Avenged we not on Theseus his assault!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Turn thyself round, and keep thine eyes close shut,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For if the Gorgon appear, and thou shouldst see it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No more returning upward would there be.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus said the Master; and he turned me round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himself, and trusted not unto my hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So far as not to blind me with his own.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O ye who have undistempered intellects,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Observe the doctrine that conceals itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath the veil of the mysterious verses!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now there came across the turbid waves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The clangour of a sound with terror fraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because of which both of the margins trembled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not otherwise it was than of a wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Impetuous on account of adverse heats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That smites the forest, and, without restraint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The branches rends, beats down, and bears away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right onward, laden with dust, it goes superb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And puts to flight the wild beasts and the shepherds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine eyes he loosed, and said: “Direct the nerve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of vision now along that ancient foam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There yonder where that smoke is most intense.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as the frogs before the hostile serpent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Across the water scatter all abroad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until each one is huddled in the earth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than a thousand ruined souls I saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus fleeing from before one who on foot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was passing o’er the Styx with soles unwet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From off his face he fanned that unctuous air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Waving his left hand oft in front of him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And only with that anguish seemed he weary.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well I perceived one sent from Heaven was he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the Master turned; and he made sign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I should quiet stand, and bow before him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! how disdainful he appeared to me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He reached the gate, and with a little rod</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He opened it, for there was no resistance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O banished out of Heaven, people despised!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus he began upon the horrid threshold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Whence is this arrogance within you couched?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore recalcitrate against that will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From which the end can never be cut off,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And which has many times increased your pain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What helpeth it to butt against the fates?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your Cerberus, if you remember well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that still bears his chin and gullet peeled.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he returned along the miry road,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spake no word to us, but had the look</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of one whom other care constrains and goads</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than that of him who in his presence is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And we our feet directed tow’rds the city,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After those holy words all confident.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within we entered without any contest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I, who inclination had to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What the condition such a fortress holds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon as I was within, cast round mine eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And see on every hand an ample plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of distress and torment terrible.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as at Arles, where stagnant grows the Rhone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as at Pola near to the Quarnaro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shuts in Italy and bathes its borders,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sepulchres make all the place uneven;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So likewise did they there on every side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saving that there the manner was more bitter;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For flames between the sepulchres were scattered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which they so intensely heated were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That iron more so asks not any art.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All of their coverings uplifted were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from them issued forth such dire laments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sooth seemed they of the wretched and tormented.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I: “My Master, what are all those people</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, having sepulture within those tombs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make themselves audible by doleful sighs?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “Here are the Heresiarchs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With their disciples of all sects, and much</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More than thou thinkest laden are the tombs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here like together with its like is buried;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more and less the monuments are heated.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when he to the right had turned, we passed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between the torments and high parapets.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-10" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Farinata and Cavalcante de’ Cavalcanti.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now onward goes, along a narrow path</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Between the torments and the city wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Master, and I follow at his back.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O power supreme, that through these impious circles</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turnest me,” I began, “as pleases thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Speak to me, and my longings satisfy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The people who are lying in these tombs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might they be seen? already are uplifted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The covers all, and no one keepeth guard.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “They all will be closed up</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When from Jehoshaphat they shall return</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here with the bodies they have left above.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their cemetery have upon this side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Epicurus all his followers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with the body mortal make the soul;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in the question thou dost put to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within here shalt thou soon be satisfied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And likewise in the wish thou keepest silent.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I: “Good Leader, I but keep concealed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From thee my heart, that I may speak the less,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor only now hast thou thereto disposed me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O Tuscan, thou who through the city of fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Goest alive, thus speaking modestly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be pleased to stay thy footsteps in this place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy mode of speaking makes thee manifest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A native of that noble fatherland,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which perhaps I too molestful was.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a sudden issued forth this sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From out one of the tombs; wherefore I pressed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fearing, a little nearer to my Leader.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unto me he said: “Turn thee; what dost thou?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behold there Farinata who has risen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the waist upwards wholly shalt thou see him.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had already fixed mine eyes on his,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he uprose erect with breast and front</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">E’en as if Hell he had in great despite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with courageous hands and prompt my Leader</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrust me between the sepulchres towards him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exclaiming, “Let thy words explicit be.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as I was at the foot of his tomb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Somewhat he eyed me, and, as if disdainful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then asked of me, “Who were thine ancestors?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, who desirous of obeying was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Concealed it not, but all revealed to him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat he raised his brows a little upward.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then said he: “Fiercely adverse have they been</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To me, and to my fathers, and my party;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that two several times I scattered them.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If they were banished, they returned on all sides,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I answered him, “the first time and the second;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yours have not acquired that art aright.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then there uprose upon the sight, uncovered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down to the chin, a shadow at his side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I think that he had risen on his knees.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round me he gazed, as if solicitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had to see if someone else were with me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But after his suspicion was all spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weeping, he said to me: “If through this blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Prison thou goest by loftiness of genius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where is my son? and why is he not with thee?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I to him: “I come not of myself;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He who is waiting yonder leads me here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom in disdain perhaps your Guido had.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His language and the mode of punishment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Already unto me had read his name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On that account my answer was so full.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up starting suddenly, he cried out: “How</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saidst thou⁠—he had? Is he not still alive?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does not the sweet light strike upon his eyes?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he became aware of some delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which I before my answer made, supine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He fell again, and forth appeared no more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the other, magnanimous, at whose desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I had remained, did not his aspect change,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Neither his neck he moved, nor bent his side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And if,” continuing his first discourse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“They have that art,” he said, “not learned aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That more tormenteth me, than doth this bed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But fifty times shall not rekindled be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The countenance of the Lady who reigns here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere thou shalt know how heavy is that art;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as thou wouldst to the sweet world return,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Say why that people is so pitiless</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against my race in each one of its laws?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence I to him: “The slaughter and great carnage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which have with crimson stained the Arbia, cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such orisons in our temple to be made.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After his head he with a sigh had shaken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“There I was not alone,” he said, “nor surely</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without a cause had with the others moved.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there I was alone, where everyone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Consented to the laying waste of Florence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He who defended her with open face.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ah! so hereafter may your seed repose,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I him entreated, “solve for me that knot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which has entangled my conceptions here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seems that you can see, if I hear rightly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beforehand whatsoe’er time brings with it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the present have another mode.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“We see, like those who have imperfect sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The things,” he said, “that distant are from us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much still shines on us the Sovereign Ruler.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they draw near, or are, is wholly vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our intellect, and if none brings it to us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not anything know we of your human state.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence thou canst understand, that wholly dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will be our knowledge from the moment when</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The portal of the future shall be closed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then I, as if compunctious for my fault,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said: “Now, then, you will tell that fallen one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That still his son is with the living joined.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if just now, in answering, I was dumb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell him I did it because I was thinking</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Already of the error you have solved me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now my Master was recalling me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore more eagerly I prayed the spirit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he would tell me who was with him there.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said: “With more than a thousand here I lie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within here is the second Frederick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the Cardinal, and of the rest I speak not.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereon he hid himself; and I towards</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ancient poet turned my steps, reflecting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon that saying, which seemed hostile to me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He moved along; and afterward thus going,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He said to me, “Why art thou so bewildered?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I in his inquiry satisfied him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Let memory preserve what thou hast heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against thyself,” that Sage commanded me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“And now attend here;” and he raised his finger.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“When thou shalt be before the radiance sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her whose beauteous eyes all things behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From her thou’lt know the journey of thy life.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the left hand then he turned his feet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We left the wall, and went towards the middle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along a path that strikes into a valley,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which even up there unpleasant made its stench.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-11" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Pope Anastasius⁠—General Description of the Inferno and its Divisions.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Upon the margin of a lofty bank</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which great rocks broken in a circle made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We came upon a still more cruel throng;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there, by reason of the horrible</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Excess of stench the deep abyss throws out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We drew ourselves aside behind the cover</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a great tomb, whereon I saw a writing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which said: “Pope Anastasius I hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom out of the right way Photinus drew.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Slow it behoveth our descent to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the sense be first a little used</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the sad blast, and then we shall not heed it.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Master thus; and unto him I said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Some compensation find, that the time pass not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Idly;” and he: “Thou seest I think of that.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My son, upon the inside of these rocks,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began he then to say, “are three small circles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From grade to grade, like those which thou art leaving.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They all are full of spirits maledict;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that hereafter sight alone suffice thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hear how and wherefore they are in constraint.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of every malice that wins hate in Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Injury is the end; and all such end</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Either by force or fraud afflicteth others.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But because fraud is man’s peculiar vice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More it displeases God; and so stand lowest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fraudulent, and greater dole assails them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the first circle of the Violent is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But since force may be used against three persons,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In three rounds ’tis divided and constructed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To God, to ourselves, and to our neighbour can we</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Use force; I say on them and on their things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As thou shalt hear with reason manifest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A death by violence, and painful wounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are to our neighbour given; and in his substance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ruin, and arson, and injurious levies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence homicides, and he who smites unjustly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Marauders, and freebooters, the first round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tormenteth all in companies diverse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Man may lay violent hands upon himself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his own goods; and therefore in the second</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Round must perforce without avail repent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whoever of your world deprives himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who games, and dissipates his property,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And weepeth there, where he should jocund be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Violence can be done the Deity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In heart denying and blaspheming Him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by disdaining Nature and her bounty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for this reason doth the smallest round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seal with its signet Sodom and Cahors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And who, disdaining God, speaks from the heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fraud, wherewithal is every conscience stung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A man may practise upon him who trusts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him who doth no confidence imburse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This latter mode, it would appear, dissevers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Only the bond of love which Nature makes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore within the second circle nestle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hypocrisy, flattery, and who deals in magic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Falsification, theft, and simony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Panders, and barrators, and the like filth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the other mode, forgotten is that love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Nature makes, and what is after added,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From which there is a special faith engendered.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence in the smallest circle, where the point is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the Universe, upon which Dis is seated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whoe’er betrays forever is consumed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I: “My Master, clear enough proceeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy reasoning, and full well distinguishes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This cavern and the people who possess it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But tell me, those within the fat lagoon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom the wind drives, and whom the rain doth beat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And who encounter with such bitter tongues,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore are they inside of the red city</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not punished, if God has them in his wrath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if he has not, wherefore in such fashion?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unto me he said: “Why wanders so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thine intellect from that which it is wont?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or, sooth, thy mind where is it elsewhere looking?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast thou no recollection of those words</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which thine Ethics thoroughly discusses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dispositions three, that Heaven abides not⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Incontinence, and Malice, and insane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bestiality? and how Incontinence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Less God offendeth, and less blame attracts?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou regardest this conclusion well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to thy mind recallest who they are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That up outside are undergoing penance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clearly wilt thou perceive why from these felons</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They separated are, and why less wroth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Justice divine doth smite them with its hammer.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O Sun, that healest all distempered vision,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou dost content me so, when thou resolvest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That doubting pleases me no less than knowing!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once more a little backward turn thee,” said I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“There where thou sayest that usury offends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Goodness divine, and disengage the knot.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Philosophy,” he said, “to him who heeds it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Noteth, not only in one place alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After what manner Nature takes her course</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Intellect Divine, and from its art;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if thy Physics carefully thou notest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After not many pages shalt thou find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That this your art as far as possible</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Follows, as the disciple doth the master;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that your art is, as it were, God’s grandchild.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From these two, if thou bringest to thy mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Genesis at the beginning, it behoves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mankind to gain their life and to advance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And since the usurer takes another way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nature herself and in her follower</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disdains he, for elsewhere he puts his hope.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But follow, now, as I would fain go on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For quivering are the Fishes on the horizon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the Wain wholly over Caurus lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And far beyond there we descend the crag.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-12" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Minotaur⁠—The Seventh Circle⁠—The Violent⁠—Phlegethon⁠—The Violent against their Neighbors⁠—The Centaurs⁠—Tyrants.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The place where to descend the bank we came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was alpine, and from what was there, moreover,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of such a kind that every eye would shun it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as that ruin is which in the flank</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Smote, on this side of Trent, the Adige,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Either by earthquake or by failing stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For from the mountain’s top, from which it moved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the plain the cliff is shattered so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some path ’twould give to him who was above;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even such was the descent of that ravine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on the border of the broken chasm</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The infamy of Crete was stretched along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who was conceived in the fictitious cow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when he us beheld, he bit himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as one whom anger racks within.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Sage towards him shouted: “Peradventure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou think’st that here may be the Duke of Athens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who in the world above brought death to thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Get thee gone, beast, for this one cometh not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Instructed by thy sister, but he comes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In order to behold your punishments.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As is that bull who breaks loose at the moment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which he has received the mortal blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who cannot walk, but staggers here and there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Minotaur beheld I do the like;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he, the wary, cried: “Run to the passage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While he wroth, ’tis well thou shouldst descend.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus down we took our way o’er that discharge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of stones, which oftentimes did move themselves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath my feet, from the unwonted burden.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thoughtful I went; and he said: “Thou art thinking</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps upon this ruin, which is guarded</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By that brute anger which just now I quenched.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now will I have thee know, the other time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I here descended to the nether Hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This precipice had not yet fallen down.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But truly, if I well discern, a little</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before His coming who the mighty spoil</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bore off from Dis, in the supernal circle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon all sides the deep and loathsome valley</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trembled so, that I thought the Universe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was thrilled with love, by which there are who think</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The world ofttimes converted into chaos;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at that moment this primeval crag</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both here and elsewhere made such overthrow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But fix thine eyes below; for draweth near</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The river of blood, within which boiling is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whoe’er by violence doth injure others.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O blind cupidity, O wrath insane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That spurs us onward so in our short life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the eternal then so badly steeps us!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw an ample moat bent like a bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one which all the plain encompasses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Conformable to what my Guide had said.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And between this and the embankment’s foot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Centaurs in file were running, armed with arrows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in the world they used the chase to follow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beholding us descend, each one stood still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from the squadron three detached themselves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bows and arrows in advance selected;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from afar one cried: “Unto what torment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come ye, who down the hillside are descending?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell us from there; if not, I draw the bow.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Master said: “Our answer will we make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Chiron, near you there; in evil hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That will of thine was evermore so hasty.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then touched he me, and said: “This one is Nessus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who perished for the lovely Dejanira,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for himself, himself did vengeance take.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he in the midst, who at his breast is gazing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is the great Chiron, who brought up Achilles;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That other Pholus is, who was so wrathful.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thousands and thousands go about the moat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shooting with shafts whatever soul emerges</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the blood, more than his crime allots.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Near we approached unto those monsters fleet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chiron an arrow took, and with the notch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Backward upon his jaws he put his beard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After he had uncovered his great mouth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He said to his companions: “Are you ware</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he behind moveth whate’er he touches?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus are not wont to do the feet of dead men.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And my good Guide, who now was at his breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where the two natures are together joined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Replied: “Indeed he lives, and thus alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me it behoves to show him the dark valley;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Necessity, and not delight, impels us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Someone withdrew from singing Halleluja,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who unto me committed this new office;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No thief is he, nor I a thievish spirit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But by that virtue through which I am moving</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My steps along this savage thoroughfare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Give us someone of thine, to be with us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And who may show us where to pass the ford,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And who may carry this one on his back;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ’tis no spirit that can walk the air.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his right breast Chiron wheeled about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said to Nessus: “Turn and do thou guide them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And warn aside, if other band may meet you.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We with our faithful escort onward moved</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the brink of the vermilion boiling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein the boiled were uttering loud laments.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>People I saw within up to the eyebrows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the great Centaur said: “Tyrants are these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who dealt in bloodshed and in pillaging.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here they lament their pitiless mischiefs; here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is Alexander, and fierce Dionysius</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who upon Sicily brought dolorous years.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That forehead there which has the hair so black</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is Azzolin; and the other who is blond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Obizzo is of Esti, who, in truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up in the world was by his stepson slain.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then turned I to the Poet; and he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Now he be first to thee, and second I.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little farther on the Centaur stopped</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above a folk, who far down as the throat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemed from that boiling stream to issue forth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shade he showed us on one side alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying: “He cleft asunder in God’s bosom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heart that still upon the Thames is honoured.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then people saw I, who from out the river</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lifted their heads and also all the chest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many among these I recognised.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus ever more and more grew shallower</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That blood, so that the feet alone it covered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there across the moat our passage was.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Even as thou here upon this side beholdest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The boiling stream, that aye diminishes,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Centaur said, “I wish thee to believe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That on this other more and more declines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its bed, until it reunites itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where it behoveth tyranny to groan.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Justice divine, upon this side, is goading</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Attila, who was a scourge on earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Pyrrhus, and Sextus; and forever milks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tears which with the boiling it unseals</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Rinier da Corneto and Rinier Pazzo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who made upon the highways so much war.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then back he turned, and passed again the ford.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-13" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Wood of Thorns⁠—The Harpies⁠—The Violent against themselves⁠—Suicides⁠—Pier della Vigna⁠—Lano and Jacopo da Sant’ Andrea.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Not yet had Nessus reached the other side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When we had put ourselves within a wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was not marked by any path whatever.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not foliage green, but of a dusky colour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not branches smooth, but gnarled and intertangled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not apple-trees were there, but thorns with poison.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such tangled thickets have not, nor so dense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those savage wild beasts, that in hatred hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twixt Cecina and Corneto the tilled places.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There do the hideous Harpies make their nests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who chased the Trojans from the Strophades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sad announcement of impending doom;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Broad wings have they, and necks and faces human,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And feet with claws, and their great bellies fledged;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They make laments upon the wondrous trees.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the good Master: “Ere thou enter farther,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Know that thou art within the second round,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus he began to say, “and shalt be, till</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou comest out upon the horrible sand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore look well around, and thou shalt see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Things that will credence give unto my speech.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I heard on all sides lamentations uttered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And person none beheld I who might make them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence, utterly bewildered, I stood still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I think he thought that I perhaps might think</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So many voices issued through those trunks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From people who concealed themselves from us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore the Master said: “If thou break off</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some little spray from any of these trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The thoughts thou hast will wholly be made vain.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then stretched I forth my hand a little forward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And plucked a branchlet off from a great thorn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the trunk cried, “Why dost thou mangle me?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After it had become embrowned with blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It recommenced its cry: “Why dost thou rend me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hast thou no spirit of pity whatsoever?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men once we were, and now are changed to trees;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Indeed, thy hand should be more pitiful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even if the souls of serpents we had been.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As out of a green brand, that is on fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At one of the ends, and from the other drips</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hisses with the wind that is escaping;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So from that splinter issued forth together</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both words and blood; whereat I let the tip</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fall, and stood like a man who is afraid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Had he been able sooner to believe,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Sage made answer, “O thou wounded soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What only in my verses he has seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not upon thee had he stretched forth his hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas the thing incredible has caused me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To put him to an act which grieveth me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But tell him who thou wast, so that by way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of some amends thy fame he may refresh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up in the world, to which he can return.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the trunk said: “So thy sweet words allure me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I cannot silent be; and you be vexed not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I a little to discourse am tempted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am the one who both keys had in keeping</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Frederick’s heart, and turned them to and fro</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So softly in unlocking and in locking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from his secrets most men I withheld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fidelity I bore the glorious office</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So great, I lost thereby my sleep and pulses.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The courtesan who never from the dwelling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Caesar turned aside her strumpet eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Death universal and the vice of courts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inflamed against me all the other minds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they, inflamed, did so inflame Augustus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That my glad honours turned to dismal mournings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My spirit, in disdainful exultation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thinking by dying to escape disdain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made me unjust against myself, the just.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, by the roots unwonted of this wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do swear to you that never broke I faith</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto my lord, who was so worthy of honour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the world if one of you return,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let him my memory comfort, which is lying</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still prostrate from the blow that envy dealt it.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waited awhile, and then: “Since he is silent,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Poet said to me, “lose not the time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But speak, and question him, if more may please thee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence I to him: “Do thou again inquire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Concerning what thou thinks’t will satisfy me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I cannot, such pity is in my heart.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore he recommenced: “So may the man</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do for thee freely what thy speech implores,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spirit incarcerate, again be pleased</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tell us in what way the soul is bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within these knots; and tell us, if thou canst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If any from such members e’er is freed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then blew the trunk amain, and afterward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wind was into such a voice converted:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“With brevity shall be replied to you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the exasperated soul abandons</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The body whence it rent itself away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Minos consigns it to the seventh abyss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It falls into the forest, and no part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is chosen for it; but where Fortune hurls it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There like a grain of spelt it germinates.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It springs a sapling, and a forest tree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Harpies, feeding then upon its leaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do pain create, and for the pain an outlet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like others for our spoils shall we return;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not that any one may them revest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ’tis not just to have what one casts off.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here we shall drag them, and along the dismal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forest our bodies shall suspended be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each to the thorn of his molested shade.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We were attentive still unto the trunk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thinking that more it yet might wish to tell us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When by a tumult we were overtaken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the same way as he is who perceives</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The boar and chase approaching to his stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who hears the crashing of the beasts and branches;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And two behold! upon our left-hand side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Naked and scratched, fleeing so furiously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of the forest, every fan they broke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who was in advance: “Now help, Death, help!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the other one, who seemed to lag too much,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was shouting: “Lano, were not so alert</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those legs of thine at joustings of the Toppo!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then, perchance because his breath was failing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He grouped himself together with a bush.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behind them was the forest full of black</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She-mastiffs, ravenous, and swift of foot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As greyhounds, who are issuing from the chain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On him who had crouched down they set their teeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him they lacerated piece by piece,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereafter bore away those aching members.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereat my Escort took me by the hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And led me to the bush, that all in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was weeping from its bloody lacerations.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O Jacopo,” it said, “of Sant’ Andrea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What helped it thee of me to make a screen?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What blame have I in thy nefarious life?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When near him had the Master stayed his steps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He said: “Who wast thou, that through wounds so many</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Art blowing out with blood thy dolorous speech?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to us: “O souls, that hither come</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To look upon the shameful massacre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That has so rent away from me my leaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gather them up beneath the dismal bush;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I of that city was which to the Baptist</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Changed its first patron, wherefore he for this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forever with his art will make it sad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And were it not that on the pass of Arno</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some glimpses of him are remaining still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those citizens, who afterwards rebuilt it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the ashes left by Attila,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vain had caused their labour to be done.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of my own house I made myself a gibbet.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-14" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Sand Waste⁠—The Violent against God⁠—Capaneus⁠—The Statue of Time, and the Four Infernal Rivers.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Because the charity of my native place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Constrained me, gathered I the scattered leaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gave them back to him, who now was hoarse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then came we to the confine, where disparted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The second round is from the third, and where</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A horrible form of Justice is beheld.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clearly to manifest these novel things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I say that we arrived upon a plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which from its bed rejecteth every plant;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dolorous forest is a garland to it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All round about, as the sad moat to that;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There close upon the edge we stayed our feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soil was of an arid and thick sand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not of another fashion made than that</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which by the feet of Cato once was pressed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vengeance of God, O how much oughtest thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By each one to be dreaded, who doth read</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That which was manifest unto mine eyes!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of naked souls beheld I many herds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who all were weeping very miserably,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And over them seemed set a law diverse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Supine upon the ground some folk were lying;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And some were sitting all drawn up together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And others went about continually.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those who were going round were far the more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And those were less who lay down to their torment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But had their tongues more loosed to lamentation.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er all the sand-waste, with a gradual fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were raining down dilated flakes of fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As of the snow on Alp without a wind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Alexander, in those torrid parts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of India, beheld upon his host</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flames fall unbroken till they reached the ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence he provided with his phalanxes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To trample down the soil, because the vapour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Better extinguished was while it was single;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus was descending the eternal heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby the sand was set on fire, like tinder</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath the steel, for doubling of the dole.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without repose forever was the dance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of miserable hands, now there, now here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shaking away from off them the fresh gleeds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Master,” began I, “thou who overcomest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All things except the demons dire, that issued</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against us at the entrance of the gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who is that mighty one who seems to heed not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fire, and lieth lowering and disdainful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the rain seems not to ripen him?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he himself, who had become aware</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I was questioning my Guide about him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cried: “Such as I was living, am I, dead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Jove should weary out his smith, from whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He seized in anger the sharp thunderbolt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith upon the last day I was smitten,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if he wearied out by turns the others</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Mongibello at the swarthy forge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vociferating, ‘Help, good Vulcan, help!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as he did there at the fight of Phlegra,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shot his bolts at me with all his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He would not have thereby a joyous vengeance.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then did my Leader speak with such great force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I had never heard him speak so loud:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“O Capaneus, in that is not extinguished</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine arrogance, thou punished art the more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not any torment, saving thine own rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would be unto thy fury pain complete.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he turned round to me with better lip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying: “One of the Seven Kings was he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who Thebes besieged, and held, and seems to hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God in disdain, and little seems to prize him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, as I said to him, his own despites</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are for his breast the fittest ornaments.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now follow me, and mind thou do not place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As yet thy feet upon the burning sand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But always keep them close unto the wood.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speaking no word, we came to where there gushes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth from the wood a little rivulet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose redness makes my hair still stand on end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As from the Bulicame springs the brooklet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sinful women later share among them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So downward through the sand it went its way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bottom of it, and both sloping banks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were made of stone, and the margins at the side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence I perceived that there the passage was.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“In all the rest which I have shown to thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since we have entered in within the gate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose threshold unto no one is denied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing has been discovered by thine eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So notable as is the present river,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which all the little flames above it quenches.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These words were of my Leader; whence I prayed him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he would give me largess of the food,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which he had given me largess of desire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“In the mid-sea there sits a wasted land,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said he thereafterward, “whose name is Crete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under whose king the world of old was chaste.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is a mountain there, that once was glad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With waters and with leaves, which was called Ida;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now ’tis deserted, as a thing worn out.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rhea once chose it for the faithful cradle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her own son; and to conceal him better,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whene’er he cried, she there had clamours made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A grand old man stands in the mount erect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who holds his shoulders turned tow’rds Damietta,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looks at Rome as if it were his mirror.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His head is fashioned of refined gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of pure silver are the arms and breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then he is brass as far down as the fork.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From that point downward all is chosen iron,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save that the right foot is of kiln-baked clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more he stands on that than on the other.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each part, except the gold, is by a fissure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Asunder cleft, that dripping is with tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which gathered together perforate that cavern.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From rock to rock they fall into this valley;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Acheron, Styx, and Phlegethon they form;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then downward go along this narrow sluice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto that point where is no more descending.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They form Cocytus; what that pool may be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou shalt behold, so here ’tis not narrated.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I to him: “If so the present runnel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth take its rise in this way from our world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why only on this verge appears it to us?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “Thou knowest the place is round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And notwithstanding thou hast journeyed far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still to the left descending to the bottom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast not yet through all the circle turned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore if something new appear to us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It should not bring amazement to thy face.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I again: “Master, where shall be found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lethe and Phlegethon, for of one thou’rt silent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sayest the other of this rain is made?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“In all thy questions truly thou dost please me,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Replied he; “but the boiling of the red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Water might well solve one of them thou makest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt see Lethe, but outside this moat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where the souls repair to lave themselves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When sin repented of has been removed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then said he: “It is time now to abandon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wood; take heed that thou come after me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A way the margins make that are not burning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And over them all vapours are extinguished.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-15" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Violent against Nature⁠—Brunetto Latini.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now bears us onward one of the hard margins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so the brooklet’s mist o’ershadows it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From fire it saves the water and the dikes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as the Flemings, ’twixt Cadsand and Bruges,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fearing the flood that tow’rds them hurls itself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their bulwarks build to put the sea to flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as the Paduans along the Brenta,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To guard their villas and their villages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ever Chiarentana feel the heat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In such similitude had those been made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Albeit not so lofty nor so thick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whoever he might be, the master made them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now were we from the forest so remote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I could not have discovered where it was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even if backward I had turned myself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we a company of souls encountered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who came beside the dike, and everyone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gazed at us, as at evening we are wont</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To eye each other under a new moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so towards us sharpened they their brows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As an old tailor at the needle’s eye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus scrutinised by such a family,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By someone I was recognised, who seized</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My garment’s hem, and cried out, “What a marvel!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, when he stretched forth his arm to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On his baked aspect fastened so mine eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the scorched countenance prevented not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His recognition by my intellect;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bowing down my face unto his own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I made reply, “Are you here, Ser Brunetto?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he: “May’t not displease thee, O my son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If a brief space with thee Brunetto Latini</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Backward return and let the trail go on.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I said to him: “With all my power I ask it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if you wish me to sit down with you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will, if he please, for I go with him.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O son,” he said, “whoever of this herd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A moment stops, lies then a hundred years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor fans himself when smiteth him the fire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore go on; I at thy skirts will come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And afterward will I rejoin my band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which goes lamenting its eternal doom.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I did not dare to go down from the road</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Level to walk with him; but my head bowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I held as one who goeth reverently.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he began: “What fortune or what fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before the last day leadeth thee down here?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And who is this that showeth thee the way?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Up there above us in the life serene,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I answered him, “I lost me in a valley,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ever yet my age had been completed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But yestermorn I turned my back upon it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This one appeared to me, returning thither,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And homeward leadeth me along this road.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “If thou thy star do follow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou canst not fail thee of a glorious port,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If well I judged in the life beautiful.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if I had not died so prematurely,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing Heaven thus benignant unto thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I would have given thee comfort in the work.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that ungrateful and malignant people,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of old time from Fesole descended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And smacks still of the mountain and the granite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will make itself, for thy good deeds, thy foe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And it is right; for among crabbed sorbs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It ill befits the sweet fig to bear fruit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old rumour in the world proclaims them blind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A people avaricious, envious, proud;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Take heed that of their customs thou do cleanse thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy fortune so much honour doth reserve thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One party and the other shall be hungry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thee; but far from goat shall be the grass.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their litter let the beasts of Fesole</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make of themselves, nor let them touch the plant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If any still upon their dunghill rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which may yet revive the consecrated</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seed of those Romans, who remained there when</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The nest of such great malice it became.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If my entreaty wholly were fulfilled,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Replied I to him, “not yet would you be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In banishment from human nature placed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in my mind is fixed, and touches now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My heart the dear and good paternal image</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of you, when in the world from hour to hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You taught me how a man becomes eternal;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how much I am grateful, while I live</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behoves that in my language be discerned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What you narrate of my career I write,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And keep it to be glossed with other text</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By a Lady who can do it, if I reach her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This much will I have manifest to you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Provided that my conscience do not chide me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For whatsoever Fortune I am ready.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such handsel is not new unto mine ears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore let Fortune turn her wheel around</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it may please her, and the churl his mattock.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Master thereupon on his right cheek</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did backward turn himself, and looked at me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then said: “He listeneth well who noteth it.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor speaking less on that account, I go</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Ser Brunetto, and I ask who are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His most known and most eminent companions.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “To know of some is well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of others it were laudable to be silent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For short would be the time for so much speech.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Know them in sum, that all of them were clerks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And men of letters great and of great fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the world tainted with the selfsame sin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Priscian goes yonder with that wretched crowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Francis of Accorso; and thou hadst seen there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thou hadst had a hankering for such scurf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That one, who by the Servant of the Servants</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Arno was transferred to Bacchiglione,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he has left his sin-excited nerves.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More would I say, but coming and discoursing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can be no longer; for that I behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">New smoke uprising yonder from the sand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A people comes with whom I may not be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Commended unto thee be my Tesoro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which I still live, and no more I ask.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he turned round, and seemed to be of those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who at Verona run for the Green Mantle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Across the plain; and seemed to be among them</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The one who wins, and not the one who loses.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-16" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Guidoguerra, Aldobrandi, and Rusticucci⁠—Cataract of the River of Blood.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now was I where was heard the reverberation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of water falling into the next round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to that humming which the beehives make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When shadows three together started forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Running, from out a company that passed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath the rain of the sharp martyrdom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards us came they, and each one cried out:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Stop, thou; for by thy garb to us thou seemest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be someone of our depraved city.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah me! what wounds I saw upon their limbs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Recent and ancient by the flames burnt in!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It pains me still but to remember it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto their cries my Teacher paused attentive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He turned his face towards me, and “Now wait,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He said; “to these we should be courteous.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if it were not for the fire that darts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The nature of this region, I should say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That haste were more becoming thee than them.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as we stood still, they recommenced</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The old refrain, and when they overtook us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Formed of themselves a wheel, all three of them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As champions stripped and oiled are wont to do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Watching for their advantage and their hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before they come to blows and thrusts between them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus, wheeling round, did every one his visage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Direct to me, so that in opposite wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His neck and feet continual journey made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, “If the misery of this soft place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bring in disdain ourselves and our entreaties,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began one, “and our aspect black and blistered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let the renown of us thy mind incline</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell us who thou art, who thus securely</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy living feet dost move along through Hell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He in whose footprints thou dost see me treading,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Naked and skinless though he now may go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was of a greater rank than thou dost think;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was the grandson of the good Gualdrada;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His name was Guidoguerra, and in life</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much did he with his wisdom and his sword.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other, who close by me treads the sand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tegghiaio Aldobrandi is, whose fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above there in the world should welcome be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, who with them on the cross am placed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Jacopo Rusticucci was; and truly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My savage wife, more than aught else, doth harm me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could I have been protected from the fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Below I should have thrown myself among them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And think the Teacher would have suffered it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as I should have burned and baked myself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My terror overmastered my good will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which made me greedy of embracing them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then I began: “Sorrow and not disdain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did your condition fix within me so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That tardily it wholly is stripped off,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as this my Lord said unto me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Words, on account of which I thought within me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That people such as you are were approaching.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I of your city am; and evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your labours and your honourable names</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I with affection have retraced and heard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I leave the gall, and go for the sweet fruits</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Promised to me by the veracious Leader;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to the centre first I needs must plunge.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“So may the soul for a long while conduct</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those limbs of thine,” did he make answer then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“And so may thy renown shine after thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Valour and courtesy, say if they dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within our city, as they used to do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or if they wholly have gone out of it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Guglielmo Borsier, who is in torment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With us of late, and goes there with his comrades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth greatly mortify us with his words.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The new inhabitants and the sudden gains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pride and extravagance have in thee engendered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Florence, so that thou weep’st thereat already!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this wise I exclaimed with face uplifted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the three, taking that for my reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Looked at each other, as one looks at truth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If other times so little it doth cost thee,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Replied they all, “to satisfy another,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Happy art thou, thus speaking at thy will!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore, if thou escape from these dark places,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And come to rebehold the beauteous stars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When it shall pleasure thee to say, ‘I was,’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See that thou speak of us unto the people.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then they broke up the wheel, and in their flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It seemed as if their agile legs were wings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not an Amen could possibly be said</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So rapidly as they had disappeared;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore the Master deemed best to depart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I followed him, and little had we gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before the sound of water was so near us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That speaking we should hardly have been heard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as that stream which holdeth its own course</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The first from Monte Veso tow’rds the East,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the left-hand slope of Apennine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is above called Acquacheta, ere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It down descendeth into its low bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at Forli is vacant of that name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reverberates there above San Benedetto</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Alps, by falling at a single leap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where for a thousand there were room enough;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus downward from a bank precipitate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We found resounding that dark-tinted water,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that it soon the ear would have offended.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had a cord around about me girt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therewithal I whilom had designed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To take the panther with the painted skin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After I this had all from me unloosed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As my Conductor had commanded me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I reached it to him, gathered up and coiled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat he turned himself to the right side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at a little distance from the verge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He cast it down into that deep abyss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“It must needs be some novelty respond,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I said within myself, “to the new signal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Master with his eye is following so.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah me! how very cautious men should be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With those who not alone behold the act,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with their wisdom look into the thoughts!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said to me: “Soon there will upward come</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What I await; and what thy thought is dreaming</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must soon reveal itself unto thy sight.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye to that truth which has the face of falsehood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A man should close his lips as far as may be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because without his fault it causes shame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But here I cannot; and, Reader, by the notes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this my Comedy to thee I swear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So may they not be void of lasting favour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Athwart that dense and darksome atmosphere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw a figure swimming upward come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Marvellous unto every steadfast heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as he returns who goeth down</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes to clear an anchor, which has grappled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reef, or aught else that in the sea is hidden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who upward stretches, and draws in his feet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-17" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Geryon⁠—The Violent against Art⁠—Usurers.⁠—Descent into the Abyss of Malebolge.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Behold the monster with the pointed tail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who cleaves the hills, and breaketh walls and weapons,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behold him who infecteth all the world.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus unto me my Guide began to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And beckoned him that he should come to shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Near to the confine of the trodden marble;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that uncleanly image of deceit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came up and thrust ashore its head and bust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But on the border did not drag its tail.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The face was as the face of a just man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its semblance outwardly was so benign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of a serpent all the trunk beside.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two paws it had, hairy unto the armpits;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The back, and breast, and both the sides it had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Depicted o’er with nooses and with shields.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With colours more, groundwork or broidery</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Never in cloth did Tartars make nor Turks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor were such tissues by Arachne laid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As sometimes wherries lie upon the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That part are in the water, part on land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as among the guzzling Germans there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The beaver plants himself to wage his war;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that vile monster lay upon the border,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is of stone, and shutteth in the sand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His tail was wholly quivering in the void,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Contorting upwards the envenomed fork,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in the guise of scorpion armed its point.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Guide said: “Now perforce must turn aside</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our way a little, even to that beast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Malevolent, that yonder coucheth him.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We therefore on the right side descended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made ten steps upon the outer verge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Completely to avoid the sand and flame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after we are come to him, I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little farther off upon the sand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A people sitting near the hollow place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then said to me the Master: “So that full</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Experience of this round thou bear away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now go and see what their condition is.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There let thy conversation be concise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till thou returnest I will speak with him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he concede to us his stalwart shoulders.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus farther still upon the outermost</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Head of that seventh circle all alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I went, where sat the melancholy folk.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of their eyes was gushing forth their woe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This way, that way, they helped them with their hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now from the flames and now from the hot soil.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not otherwise in summer do the dogs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now with the foot, now with the muzzle, when</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By fleas, or flies, or gadflies, they are bitten.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I had turned mine eyes upon the faces</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of some, on whom the dolorous fire is falling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not one of them I knew; but I perceived</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from the neck of each there hung a pouch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which certain colour had, and certain blazon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thereupon it seems their eyes are feeding.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as I gazing round me come among them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a yellow pouch I azure saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had the face and posture of a lion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proceeding then the current of my sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another of them saw I, red as blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Display a goose more white than butter is.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one, who with an azure sow and gravid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emblazoned had his little pouch of white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said unto me: “What dost thou in this moat?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now get thee gone; and since thou’rt still alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Know that a neighbour of mine, Vitaliano,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will have his seat here on my left-hand side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Paduan am I with these Florentines;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many a time they thunder in mine ears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exclaiming, ‘Come the sovereign cavalier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who shall bring the satchel with three goats;’ ”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then twisted he his mouth, and forth he thrust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His tongue, like to an ox that licks its nose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fearing lest my longer stay might vex</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him who had warned me not to tarry long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Backward I turned me from those weary souls.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I found my Guide, who had already mounted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the back of that wild animal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said to me: “Now be both strong and bold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now we descend by stairways such as these;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mount thou in front, for I will be midway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the tail may have no power to harm thee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as he is who has so near the ague</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of quartan that his nails are blue already,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trembles all, but looking at the shade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even such became I at those proffered words;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But shame in me his menaces produced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which maketh servant strong before good master.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I seated me upon those monstrous shoulders;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I wished to say, and yet the voice came not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I believed, “Take heed that thou embrace me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he, who other times had rescued me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In other peril, soon as I had mounted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within his arms encircled and sustained me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said: “Now, Geryon, bestir thyself;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The circles large, and the descent be little;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Think of the novel burden which thou hast.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as the little vessel shoves from shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Backward, still backward, so he thence withdrew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when he wholly felt himself afloat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There where his breast had been he turned his tail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that extended like an eel he moved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his paws drew to himself the air.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A greater fear I do not think there was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What time abandoned Phaeton the reins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby the heavens, as still appears, were scorched;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor when the wretched Icarus his flanks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Felt stripped of feathers by the melting wax,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His father crying, “An ill way thou takest!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than was my own, when I perceived myself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On all sides in the air, and saw extinguished</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sight of everything but of the monster.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onward he goeth, swimming slowly, slowly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wheels and descends, but I perceive it only</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By wind upon my face and from below.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I heard already on the right the whirlpool</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Making a horrible crashing under us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence I thrust out my head with eyes cast downward.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then was I still more fearful of the abyss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because I fires beheld, and heard laments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat I, trembling, all the closer cling.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw then, for before I had not seen it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The turning and descending, by great horrors</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That were approaching upon divers sides.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As falcon who has long been on the wing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, without seeing either lure or bird,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Maketh the falconer say, “Ah me, thou stoopest,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Descendeth weary, whence he started swiftly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thorough a hundred circles, and alights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far from his master, sullen and disdainful;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even thus did Geryon place us on the bottom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Close to the bases of the rough-hewn rock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And being disencumbered of our persons,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sped away as arrow from the string.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-18" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Eighth Circle: Malebolge⁠—The Fraudulent⁠—The First Bolgia: Seducers and Panders⁠—Venedico Caccianimico⁠—Jason⁠—The Second Bolgia: Flatterers⁠—Allessio Interminelli⁠—Thaïs.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There is a place in Hell called Malebolge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wholly of stone and of an iron colour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As is the circle that around it turns.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right in the middle of the field malign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There yawns a well exceeding wide and deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which its place the structure will recount.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round, then, is that enclosure which remains</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Between the well and foot of the high, hard bank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And has distinct in valleys ten its bottom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As where for the protection of the walls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Many and many moats surround the castles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The part in which they are a figure forms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just such an image those presented there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as about such strongholds from their gates</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the outer bank are little bridges,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So from the precipice’s base did crags</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Project, which intersected dikes and moats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the well that truncates and collects them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within this place, down shaken from the back</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Geryon, we found us; and the Poet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Held to the left, and I moved on behind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon my right hand I beheld new anguish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">New torments, and new wielders of the lash,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith the foremost Bolgia was replete.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down at the bottom were the sinners naked;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This side the middle came they facing us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beyond it, with us, but with greater steps;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as the Romans, for the mighty host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The year of Jubilee, upon the bridge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have chosen a mode to pass the people over;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all upon one side towards the Castle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their faces have, and go unto <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the other side they go towards the Mountain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This side and that, along the livid stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld I horned demons with great scourges,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who cruelly were beating them behind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah me! how they did make them lift their legs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At the first blows! and sooth not any one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The second waited for, nor for the third.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While I was going on, mine eyes by one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Encountered were; and straight I said: “Already</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sight of this one I am not unfed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore I stayed my feet to make him out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with me the sweet Guide came to a stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to my going somewhat back assented;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he, the scourged one, thought to hide himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lowering his face, but little it availed him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For said I: “Thou that castest down thine eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If false are not the features which thou bearest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou art Venedico Caccianimico;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what doth bring thee to such pungent sauces?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “Unwillingly I tell it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But forces me thine utterance distinct,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which makes me recollect the ancient world.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was the one who the fair Ghisola</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Induced to grant the wishes of the Marquis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Howe’er the shameless story may be told.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not the sole Bolognese am I who weeps here;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nay, rather is this place so full of them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That not so many tongues today are taught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twixt Reno and Savena to say <i>sipa</i>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if thereof thou wishest pledge or proof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bring to thy mind our avaricious heart.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While speaking in this manner, with his scourge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A demon smote him, and said: “Get thee gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pander, there are no women here for coin.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I joined myself again unto mine Escort;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereafterward with footsteps few we came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To where a crag projected from the bank.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This very easily did we ascend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turning to the right along its ridge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From those eternal circles we departed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we were there, where it is hollowed out</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath, to give a passage to the scourged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Guide said: “Wait, and see that on thee strike</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The vision of those others evil-born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom thou hast not yet beheld the faces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because together with us they have gone.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the old bridge we looked upon the train</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which tow’rds us came upon the other border,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And which the scourges in like manner smite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the good Master, without my inquiring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said to me: “See that tall one who is coming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for his pain seems not to shed a tear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still what a royal aspect he retains!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Jason is, who by his heart and cunning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Colchians of the Ram made destitute.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He by the isle of Lemnos passed along</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After the daring women pitiless</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had unto death devoted all their males.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There with his tokens and with ornate words</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did he deceive Hypsipyle, the maiden</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who first, herself, had all the rest deceived.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There did he leave her pregnant and forlorn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such sin unto such punishment condemns him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And also for Medea is vengeance done.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With him go those who in such wise deceive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this sufficient be of the first valley</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To know, and those that in its jaws it holds.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We were already where the narrow path</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crosses athwart the second dike, and forms</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that a buttress for another arch.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thence we heard people, who are making moan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the next Bolgia, snorting with their muzzles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with their palms beating upon themselves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The margins were incrusted with a mould</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By exhalation from below, that sticks there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the eyes and nostrils wages war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bottom is so deep, no place suffices</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To give us sight of it, without ascending</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The arch’s back, where most the crag impends.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thither we came, and thence down in the moat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw a people smothered in a filth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That out of human privies seemed to flow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whilst below there with mine eye I search,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw one with his head so foul with ordure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was not clear if he were clerk or layman.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He screamed to me: “Wherefore art thou so eager</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To look at me more than the other foul ones?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I to him: “Because, if I remember,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have already seen thee with dry hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thou’rt Alessio Interminei of Lucca;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore I eye thee more than all the others.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he thereon, belabouring his pumpkin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“The flatteries have submerged me here below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith my tongue was never surfeited.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then said to me the Guide: “See that thou thrust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy visage somewhat farther in advance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with thine eyes thou well the face attain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that uncleanly and dishevelled drab,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who there doth scratch herself with filthy nails,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crouches now, and now on foot is standing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thais the harlot is it, who replied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto her paramour, when he said, ‘Have I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great gratitude from thee?’⁠—‘Nay, marvellous;’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And herewith let our sight be satisfied.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-19" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Third Bolgia: the Simoniacs⁠—Pope Nicholas <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O Simon Magus, O forlorn disciples,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye who the things of God, which ought to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The brides of holiness, rapaciously</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For silver and for gold do prostitute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now it behoves for you the trumpet sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because in this third Bolgia ye abide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We had already on the following tomb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ascended to that portion of the crag</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which o’er the middle of the moat hangs plumb.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wisdom supreme, O how great art thou showest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In heaven, in earth, and in the evil world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with what justice doth thy power distribute!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw upon the sides and on the bottom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The livid stone with perforations filled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All of one size, and everyone was round.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me less ample seemed they not, nor greater</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than those that in my beautiful Saint John</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are fashioned for the place of the baptisers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one of which, not many years ago,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I broke for someone, who was drowning in it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be this a seal all men to undeceive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of the mouth of each one there protruded</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The feet of a transgressor, and the legs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up to the calf, the rest within remained.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all of them the soles were both on fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore the joints so violently quivered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They would have snapped asunder withes and bands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as the flame of unctuous things is wont</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To move upon the outer surface only,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So likewise was it there from heel to point.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Master, who is that one who writhes himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More than his other comrades quivering,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I said, “and whom a redder flame is sucking?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “If thou wilt have me bear thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down there along that bank which lowest lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From him thou’lt know his errors and himself.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I: “What pleases thee, to me is pleasing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou art my Lord, and knowest that I depart not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From thy desire, and knowest what is not spoken.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Straightway upon the fourth dike we arrived;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We turned, and on the left-hand side descended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down to the bottom full of holes and narrow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the good Master yet from off his haunch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deposed me not, till to the hole he brought me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of him who so lamented with his shanks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Whoe’er thou art, that standest upside down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O doleful soul, implanted like a stake,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To say began I, “if thou canst, speak out.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I stood even as the friar who is confessing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The false assassin, who, when he is fixed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Recalls him, so that death may be delayed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he cried out: “Dost thou stand there already,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dost thou stand there already, Boniface?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By many years the record lied to me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art thou so early satiate with that wealth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which thou didst not fear to take by fraud</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The beautiful Lady, and then work her woe?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such I became, as people are who stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not comprehending what is answered them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if bemocked, and know not how to answer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then said Virgilius: “Say to him straightway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">‘I am not he, I am not he thou thinkest.’ ”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I replied as was imposed on me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat the spirit writhed with both his feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, sighing, with a voice of lamentation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said to me: “Then what wantest thou of me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If who I am thou carest so much to know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thou on that account hast crossed the bank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Know that I vested was with the great mantle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And truly was I son of the She-bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So eager to advance the cubs, that wealth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above, and here myself, I pocketed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath my head the others are dragged down</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who have preceded me in simony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flattened along the fissure of the rock.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Below there I shall likewise fall, whenever</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That one shall come who I believed thou wast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What time the sudden question I proposed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But longer I my feet already toast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And here have been in this way upside down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than he will planted stay with reddened feet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For after him shall come of fouler deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From tow’rds the west a Pastor without law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as befits to cover him and me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New Jason will he be, of whom we read</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Maccabees; and as his king was pliant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So he who governs France shall be to this one.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I do not know if I were here too bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That him I answered only in this metre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“I pray thee tell me now how great a treasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our Lord demanded of Saint Peter first,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before he put the keys into his keeping?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Truly he nothing asked but ‘Follow me.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor Peter nor the rest asked of Matthias</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Silver or gold, when he by lot was chosen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the place the guilty soul had lost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore stay here, for thou art justly punished,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And keep safe guard o’er the ill-gotten money,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which caused thee to be valiant against Charles.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And were it not that still forbids it me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The reverence for the keys superlative</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou hadst in keeping in the gladsome life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would make use of words more grievous still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because your avarice afflicts the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trampling the good and lifting the depraved.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Evangelist you Pastors had in mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When she who sitteth upon many waters</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fornicate with kings by him was seen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same who with the seven heads was born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And power and strength from the ten horns received,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long as virtue to her spouse was pleasing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye have made yourselves a god of gold and silver;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from the idolater how differ ye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save that he one, and ye a hundred worship?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, Constantine! of how much ill was mother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not thy conversion, but that marriage dower</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which the first wealthy Father took from thee!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And while I sang to him such notes as these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Either that anger or that conscience stung him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He struggled violently with both his feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I think in sooth that it my Leader pleased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such contented lip he listened ever</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the sound of the true words expressed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore with both his arms he took me up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when he had me all upon his breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remounted by the way where he descended.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor did he tire to have me clasped to him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But bore me to the summit of the arch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which from the fourth dike to the fifth is passage.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There tenderly he laid his burden down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tenderly on the crag uneven and steep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That would have been hard passage for the goats:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thence was unveiled to me another valley.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-20" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Fourth Bolgia: Soothsayers⁠—Amphiaraüs, Tiresias, Aruns, Manto, Eryphylus, Michael Scott, Guido Bonatti, and Asdente.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Of a new pain behoves me to make verses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And give material to the twentieth canto</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the first song, which is of the submerged.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was already thoroughly disposed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To peer down into the uncovered depth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which bathed itself with tears of agony;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And people saw I through the circular valley,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Silent and weeping, coming at the pace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in this world the Litanies assume.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As lower down my sight descended on them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wondrously each one seemed to be distorted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From chin to the beginning of the chest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For tow’rds the reins the countenance was turned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And backward it behoved them to advance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As to look forward had been taken from them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perchance indeed by violence of palsy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Someone has been thus wholly turned awry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I ne’er saw it, nor believe it can be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As God may let thee, Reader, gather fruit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From this thy reading, think now for thyself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How I could ever keep my face unmoistened,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When our own image near me I beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Distorted so, the weeping of the eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the fissure bathed the hinder parts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Truly I wept, leaning upon a peak</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the hard crag, so that my Escort said</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To me: “Art thou, too, of the other fools?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here pity lives when it is wholly dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who is a greater reprobate than he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who feels compassion at the doom divine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lift up, lift up thy head, and see for whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Opened the earth before the Thebans’ eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore they all cried: ‘Whither rushest thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amphiaraus? Why dost leave the war?’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And downward ceased he not to fall amain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As far as Minos, who lays hold on all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See, he has made a bosom of his shoulders!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because he wished to see too far before him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behind he looks, and backward goes his way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold Tiresias, who his semblance changed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When from a male a female he became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His members being all of them transformed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And afterwards was forced to strike once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The two entangled serpents with his rod,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere he could have again his manly plumes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Aruns is, who backs the other’s belly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who in the hills of Luni, there where grubs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Carrarese who houses underneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the marbles white a cavern had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his abode; whence to behold the stars</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sea, the view was not cut off from him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she there, who is covering up her breasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which thou beholdest not, with loosened tresses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on that side has all the hairy skin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was Manto, who made quest through many lands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Afterwards tarried there where I was born;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof I would thou list to me a little.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After her father had from life departed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the city of Bacchus had become enslaved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She a long season wandered through the world.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above in beauteous Italy lies a lake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At the Alp’s foot that shuts in Germany</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over Tyrol, and has the name Benaco.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By a thousand springs, I think, and more, is bathed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twixt Garda and Val Camonica, Pennino,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With water that grows stagnant in that lake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Midway a place is where the Trentine Pastor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he of Brescia, and the Veronese</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might give his blessing, if he passed that way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sitteth Peschiera, fortress fair and strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To front the Brescians and the Bergamasks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where round about the bank descendeth lowest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There of necessity must fall whatever</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In bosom of Benaco cannot stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And grows a river down through verdant pastures.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon as the water doth begin to run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No more Benaco is it called, but Mincio,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far as Governo, where it falls in Po.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not far it runs before it finds a plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which it spreads itself, and makes it marshy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft ’tis wont in summer to be sickly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Passing that way the virgin pitiless</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Land in the middle of the fen descried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untilled and naked of inhabitants;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There to escape all human intercourse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She with her servants stayed, her arts to practise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lived, and left her empty body there.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The men, thereafter, who were scattered round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Collected in that place, which was made strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the lagoon it had on every side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They built their city over those dead bones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, after her who first the place selected,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mantua named it, without other omen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its people once within more crowded were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere the stupidity of Casalodi</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Pinamonte had received deceit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore I caution thee, if e’er thou hearest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Originate my city otherwise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No falsehood may the verity defraud.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I: “My Master, thy discourses are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To me so certain, and so take my faith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That unto me the rest would be spent coals.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But tell me of the people who are passing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If any one noteworthy thou beholdest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For only unto that my mind reverts.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then said he to me: “He who from the cheek</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrusts out his beard upon his swarthy shoulders</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was, at the time when Greece was void of males,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that there scarce remained one in the cradle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An augur, and with Calchas gave the moment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Aulis, when to sever the first cable.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eryphylus his name was, and so sings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My lofty Tragedy in some part or other;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That knowest thou well, who knowest the whole of it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The next, who is so slender in the flanks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was Michael Scott, who of a verity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of magical illusions knew the game.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold Guido Bonatti, behold Asdente,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who now unto his leather and his thread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would fain have stuck, but he too late repents.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold the wretched ones, who left the needle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The spool and rock, and made them fortune-tellers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They wrought their magic spells with herb and image.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But come now, for already holds the confines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of both the hemispheres, and under Seville</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Touches the ocean-wave, Cain and the thorns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yesternight the moon was round already;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou shouldst remember well it did not harm thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From time to time within the forest deep.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus spake he to me, and we walked the while.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-21" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Fifth Bolgia: Peculators⁠—The Elder of Santa Zita⁠—Malebranche.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>From bridge to bridge thus, speaking other things</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which my Comedy cares not to sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We came along, and held the summit, when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We halted to behold another fissure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Malebolge and other vain laments;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I beheld it marvellously dark.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in the Arsenal of the Venetians</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Boils in the winter the tenacious pitch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To smear their unsound vessels o’er again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sail they cannot; and instead thereof</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One makes his vessel new, and one recaulks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ribs of that which many a voyage has made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One hammers at the prow, one at the stern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This one makes oars, and that one cordage twists,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another mends the mainsail and the mizzen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus, not by fire, but by the art divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was boiling down below there a dense pitch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which upon every side the bank belimed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw it, but I did not see within it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aught but the bubbles that the boiling raised,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all swell up and resubside compressed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The while below there fixedly I gazed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Leader, crying out: “Beware, beware!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drew me unto himself from where I stood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then I turned round, as one who is impatient</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see what it behoves him to escape,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whom a sudden terror doth unman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, while he looks, delays not his departure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I beheld behind us a black devil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Running along upon the crag, approach.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, how ferocious was he in his aspect!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how he seemed to me in action ruthless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With open wings and light upon his feet!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His shoulders, which sharp-pointed were and high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sinner did encumber with both haunches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he held clutched the sinews of the feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From off our bridge, he said: “O Malebranche,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behold one of the elders of Saint Zita;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Plunge him beneath, for I return for others</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto that town, which is well furnished with them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All there are barrators, except Bonturo;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No into Yes for money there is changed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hurled him down, and over the hard crag</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turned round, and never was a mastiff loosened</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In so much hurry to pursue a thief.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other sank, and rose again face downward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the demons, under cover of the bridge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cried: “Here the Santo Volto has no place!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here swims one otherwise than in the Serchio;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, if for our gaffs thou wishest not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do not uplift thyself above the pitch.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They seized him then with more than a hundred rakes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They said: “It here behoves thee to dance covered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, if thou canst, thou secretly mayest pilfer.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not otherwise the cooks their scullions make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Immerse into the middle of the caldron</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The meat with hooks, so that it may not float.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said the good Master to me: “That it be not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Apparent thou art here, crouch thyself down</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behind a jag, that thou mayest have some screen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for no outrage that is done to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be thou afraid, because these things I know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For once before was I in such a scuffle.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he passed on beyond the bridge’s head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as upon the sixth bank he arrived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Need was for him to have a steadfast front.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the same fury, and the same uproar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As dogs leap out upon a mendicant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who on a sudden begs, where’er he stops,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They issued from beneath the little bridge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turned against him all their grappling-irons;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he cried out: “Be none of you malignant!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before those hooks of yours lay hold of me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let one of you step forward, who may hear me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then take counsel as to grappling me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They all cried out: “Let Malacoda go;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat one started, and the rest stood still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he came to him, saying: “What avails it?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thinkest thou, Malacoda, to behold me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Advanced into this place,” my Master said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Safe hitherto from all your skill of fence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without the will divine, and fate auspicious?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let me go on, for it in Heaven is willed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I another show this savage road.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then was his arrogance so humbled in him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he let fall his grapnel at his feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the others said: “Now strike him not.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unto me my Guide: “O thou, who sittest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among the splinters of the bridge crouched down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Securely now return to me again.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore I started and came swiftly to him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the devils forward thrust themselves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that I feared they would not keep their compact.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus beheld I once afraid the soldiers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who issued under safeguard from Caprona,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing themselves among so many foes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Close did I press myself with all my person</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beside my Leader, and turned not mine eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From off their countenance, which was not good.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They lowered their rakes, and “Wilt thou have me hit him,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They said to one another, “on the rump?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And answered: “Yes; see that thou nick him with it.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the same demon who was holding parley</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With my Conductor turned him very quickly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said: “Be quiet, be quiet, Scarmiglione;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then said to us: “You can no farther go</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forward upon this crag, because is lying</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All shattered, at the bottom, the sixth arch.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if it still doth please you to go onward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pursue your way along upon this rock;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Near is another crag that yields a path.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yesterday, five hours later than this hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One thousand and two hundred sixty-six</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Years were complete, that here the way was broken.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I send in that direction some of mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see if any one doth air himself;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Go ye with them; for they will not be vicious.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Step forward, Alichino and Calcabrina,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began he to cry out, “and thou, Cagnazzo;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Barbariccia, do thou guide the ten.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come forward, Libicocco and Draghignazzo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tusked Ciriatto and Graffiacane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Farfarello and mad Rubicante;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Search ye all round about the boiling pitch;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let these be safe as far as the next crag,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all unbroken passes o’er the dens.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O me! what is it, Master, that I see?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pray let us go,” I said, “without an escort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thou knowest how, since for myself I ask none.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou art as observant as thy wont is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dost thou not see that they do gnash their teeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with their brows are threatening woe to us?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “I will not have thee fear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let them gnash on, according to their fancy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because they do it for those boiling wretches.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the left-hand dike they wheeled about;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But first had each one thrust his tongue between</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His teeth towards their leader for a signal;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he had made a trumpet of his rump.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-22" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXII</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Ciampolo, Friar Gomita, and Michael Zanche.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I have erewhile seen horsemen moving camp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Begin the storming, and their muster make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sometimes starting off for their escape;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vaunt-couriers have I seen upon your land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O Aretines, and foragers go forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tournaments stricken, and the joustings run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes with trumpets and sometimes with bells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With kettledrums, and signals of the castles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with our own, and with outlandish things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But never yet with bagpipe so uncouth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did I see horsemen move, nor infantry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor ship by any sign of land or star.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We went upon our way with the ten demons;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah, savage company! but in the church</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With saints, and in the tavern with the gluttons!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever upon the pitch was my intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see the whole condition of that Bolgia,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the people who therein were burned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as the dolphins, when they make a sign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To mariners by arching of the back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they should counsel take to save their vessel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus sometimes, to alleviate his pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One of the sinners would display his back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in less time conceal it than it lightens.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As on the brink of water in a ditch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The frogs stand only with their muzzles out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that they hide their feet and other bulk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So upon every side the sinners stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ever as Barbariccia near them came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus underneath the boiling they withdrew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw, and still my heart doth shudder at it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One waiting thus, even as it comes to pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One frog remains, and down another dives;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Graffiacan, who most confronted him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grappled him by his tresses smeared with pitch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drew him up, so that he seemed an otter.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I knew, before, the names of all of them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So had I noted them when they were chosen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when they called each other, listened how.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O Rubicante, see that thou do lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy claws upon him, so that thou mayst flay him,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cried all together the accursed ones.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I: “My Master, see to it, if thou canst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thou mayst know who is the luckless wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus come into his adversaries’ hands.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Near to the side of him my Leader drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Asked of him whence he was; and he replied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“I in the kingdom of Navarre was born;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My mother placed me servant to a lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she had borne me to a ribald knave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Destroyer of himself and of his things.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then I domestic was of good King Thibault;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I set me there to practise barratry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which I pay the reckoning in this heat.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Ciriatto, from whose mouth projected,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On either side, a tusk, as in a boar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Caused him to feel how one of them could rip.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among malicious cats the mouse had come;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Barbariccia clasped him in his arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said: “Stand ye aside, while I enfork him.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to my Master he turned round his head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ask him again,” he said, “if more thou wish</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To know from him, before someone destroy him.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Guide: “Now tell then of the other culprits;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knowest thou any one who is a Latian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the pitch?” And he: “I separated</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lately from one who was a neighbour to it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would that I still were covered up with him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I should fear not either claw nor hook!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Libicocco: “We have borne too much;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his grapnel seized him by the arm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that, by rending, he tore off a tendon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eke Draghignazzo wished to pounce upon him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down at the legs; whence their Decurion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turned round and round about with evil look.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they again somewhat were pacified,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of him, who still was looking at his wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Demanded my Conductor without stay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Who was that one, from whom a luckless parting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou sayest thou hast made, to come ashore?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he replied: “It was the Friar Gomita,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He of Gallura, vessel of all fraud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who had the enemies of his Lord in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dealt so with them each exults thereat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Money he took, and let them smoothly off,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he says; and in other offices</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A barrator was he, not mean but sovereign.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foregathers with him one Don Michael Zanche</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Logodoro; and of Sardinia</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To gossip never do their tongues feel tired.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O me! see that one, how he grinds his teeth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still farther would I speak, but am afraid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lest he to scratch my itch be making ready.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the grand Provost, turned to Farfarello,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who rolled his eyes about as if to strike,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said: “Stand aside there, thou malicious bird.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If you desire either to see or hear,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The terror-stricken recommenced thereon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Tuscans or Lombards, I will make them come.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let the Malebranche cease a little,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that these may not their revenges fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I, down sitting in this very place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one that I am will make seven come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I shall whistle, as our custom is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To do whenever one of us comes out.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cagnazzo at these words his muzzle lifted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shaking his head, and said: “Just hear the trick</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he has thought of, down to throw himself!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence he, who snares in great abundance had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Responded: “I by far too cunning am,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I procure for mine a greater sadness.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alichin held not in, but running counter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the rest, said to him: “If thou dive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will not follow thee upon the gallop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I will beat my wings above the pitch;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The height be left, and be the bank a shield</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see if thou alone dost countervail us.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O thou who readest, thou shalt hear new sport!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each to the other side his eyes averted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He first, who most reluctant was to do it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Navarrese selected well his time;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Planted his feet on land, and in a moment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leaped, and released himself from their design.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat each one was suddenly stung with shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he most who was cause of the defeat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore he moved, and cried: “Thou art o’ertakern.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But little it availed, for wings could not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Outstrip the fear; the other one went under,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, flying, upward he his breast directed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not otherwise the duck upon a sudden</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dives under, when the falcon is approaching,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And upward he returneth cross and weary.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Infuriate at the mockery, Calcabrina</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flying behind him followed close, desirous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other should escape, to have a quarrel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when the barrator had disappeared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He turned his talons upon his companion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And grappled with him right above the moat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But sooth the other was a doughty sparhawk</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To clapperclaw him well; and both of them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fell in the middle of the boiling pond.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sudden intercessor was the heat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ne’ertheless of rising there was naught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To such degree they had their wings belimed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lamenting with the others, Barbariccia</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made four of them fly to the other side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all their gaffs, and very speedily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This side and that they to their posts descended;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They stretched their hooks towards the pitch-ensnared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who were already baked within the crust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in this manner busied did we leave them.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-23" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Sixth Bolgia: Hypocrites⁠—Catalano and Loderingo⁠—Caiaphas.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Silent, alone, and without company</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We went, the one in front, the other after,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As go the Minor Friars along their way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the fable of Aesop was directed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My thought, by reason of the present quarrel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he has spoken of the frog and mouse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For <i>mo</i> and <i>issa</i> are not more alike</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than this one is to that, if well we couple</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">End and beginning with a steadfast mind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even as one thought from another springs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So afterward from that was born another,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which the first fear within me double made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus did I ponder: “These on our account</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are laughed to scorn, with injury and scoff</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So great, that much I think it must annoy them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If anger be engrafted on ill-will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They will come after us more merciless</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than dog upon the leveret which he seizes,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I felt my hair stand all on end already</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With terror, and stood backwardly intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When said I: “Master, if thou hidest not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thyself and me forthwith, of Malebranche</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I am in dread; we have them now behind us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I so imagine them, I already feel them.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he: “If I were made of leaded glass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thine outward image I should not attract</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sooner to me than I imprint the inner.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just now thy thoughts came in among my own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With similar attitude and similar face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that of both one counsel sole I made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If peradventure the right bank so slope</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That we to the next Bolgia can descend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We shall escape from the imagined chase.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not yet he finished rendering such opinion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I beheld them come with outstretched wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not far remote, with will to seize upon us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Leader on a sudden seized me up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as a mother who by noise is wakened,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And close beside her sees the enkindled flames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who takes her son, and flies, and does not stop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having more care of him than of herself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that she clothes her only with a shift;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And downward from the top of the hard bank</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Supine he gave him to the pendent rock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That one side of the other Bolgia walls.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne’er ran so swiftly water through a sluice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To turn the wheel of any land-built mill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When nearest to the paddles it approaches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As did my Master down along that border,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bearing me with him on his breast away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As his own son, and not as a companion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hardly the bed of the ravine below</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His feet had reached, ere they had reached the hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right over us; but he was not afraid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the high Providence, which had ordained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To place them ministers of the fifth moat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The power of thence departing took from all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A painted people there below we found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who went about with footsteps very slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weeping and in their semblance tired and vanquished.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They had on mantles with the hoods low down</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before their eyes, and fashioned of the cut</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in Cologne they for the monks are made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without, they gilded are so that it dazzles;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But inwardly all leaden and so heavy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Frederick used to put them on of straw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O everlastingly fatiguing mantle!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Again we turned us, still to the left hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along with them, intent on their sad plaint;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But owing to the weight, that weary folk</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came on so tardily, that we were new</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In company at each motion of the haunch.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence I unto my Leader: “See thou find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Someone who may by deed or name be known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thus in going move thine eye about.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one, who understood the Tuscan speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cried to us from behind: “Stay ye your feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye, who so run athwart the dusky air!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps thou’lt have from me what thou demandest.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat the Leader turned him, and said: “Wait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then according to his pace proceed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I stopped, and two beheld I show great haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of spirit, in their faces, to be with me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the burden and the narrow way delayed them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they came up, long with an eye askance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They scanned me without uttering a word.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then to each other turned, and said together:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“He by the action of his throat seems living;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if they dead are, by what privilege</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Go they uncovered by the heavy stole?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then said to me: “Tuscan, who to the college</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of miserable hypocrites art come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do not disdain to tell us who thou art.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I to them: “Born was I, and grew up</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the great town on the fair river of Arno,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the body am I’ve always had.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But who are ye, in whom there trickles down</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along your cheeks such grief as I behold?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And what pain is upon you, that so sparkles?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one replied to me: “These orange cloaks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are made of lead so heavy, that the weights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cause in this way their balances to creak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frati Gaudenti were we, and Bolognese;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I Catalano, and he Loderingo</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Named, and together taken by thy city,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the wont is to take one man alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For maintenance of its peace; and we were such</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That still it is apparent round Gardingo.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O Friars,” began I, “your iniquitous …”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But said no more; for to mine eyes there rushed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One crucified with three stakes on the ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When me he saw, he writhed himself all over,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blowing into his beard with suspirations;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the Friar Catalan, who noticed this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said to me: “This transfixed one, whom thou seest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Counselled the Pharisees that it was meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To put one man to torture for the people.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crosswise and naked is he on the path,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As thou perceivest; and he needs must feel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whoever passes, first how much he weighs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in like mode his father-in-law is punished</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within this moat, and the others of the council,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which for the Jews was a malignant seed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thereupon I saw Virgilius marvel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’er him who was extended on the cross</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So vilely in eternal banishment.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he directed to the Friar this voice:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Be not displeased, if granted thee, to tell us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If to the right hand any pass slope down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By which we two may issue forth from here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without constraining some of the black angels</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To come and extricate us from this deep.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he made answer: “Nearer than thou hopest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There is a rock, that forth from the great circle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proceeds, and crosses all the cruel valleys,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save that at this ’tis broken, and does not bridge it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You will be able to mount up the ruin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sidelong slopes and at the bottom rises.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Leader stood awhile with head bowed down;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then said: “The business badly he recounted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who grapples with his hook the sinners yonder.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Friar: “Many of the Devil’s vices</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Once heard I at Bologna, and among them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he’s a liar and the father of lies.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereat my Leader with great strides went on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Somewhat disturbed with anger in his looks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence from the heavy-laden I departed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the prints of his beloved feet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-24" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Seventh Bolgia: Thieves⁠—Vanni Fucci.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In that part of the youthful year wherein</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Sun his locks beneath Aquarius tempers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now the nights draw near to half the day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What time the hoarfrost copies on the ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The outward semblance of her sister white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But little lasts the temper of her pen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The husbandman, whose forage faileth him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rises, and looks, and seeth the champaign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All gleaming white, whereat he beats his flank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Returns in doors, and up and down laments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a poor wretch, who knows not what to do;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then he returns and hope revives again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeing the world has changed its countenance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In little time, and takes his shepherd’s crook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forth the little lambs to pasture drives.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus did the Master fill me with alarm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I beheld his forehead so disturbed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the ailment came as soon the plaster.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as we came unto the ruined bridge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Leader turned to me with that sweet look</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which at the mountain’s foot I first beheld.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His arms he opened, after some advisement</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within himself elected, looking first</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well at the ruin, and laid hold of me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even as he who acts and meditates,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For aye it seems that he provides beforehand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So upward lifting me towards the summit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a huge rock, he scanned another crag,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying: “To that one grapple afterwards,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But try first if ’tis such that it will hold thee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This was no way for one clothed with a cloak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For hardly we, he light, and I pushed upward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were able to ascend from jag to jag.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And had it not been, that upon that precinct</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shorter was the ascent than on the other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He I know not, but I had been dead beat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But because Malebolge tow’rds the mouth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the profoundest well is all inclining,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The structure of each valley doth import</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That one bank rises and the other sinks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still we arrived at length upon the point</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefrom the last stone breaks itself asunder.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The breath was from my lungs so milked away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I was up, that I could go no farther,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nay, I sat down upon my first arrival.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now it behoves thee thus to put off sloth,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Master said; “for sitting upon down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or under quilt, one cometh not to fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Withouten which whoso his life consumes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such vestige leaveth of himself on earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As smoke in air or in the water foam.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore raise thee up, o’ercome the anguish</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With spirit that o’ercometh every battle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If with its heavy body it sink not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A longer stairway it behoves thee mount;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis not enough from these to have departed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let it avail thee, if thou understand me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then I uprose, showing myself provided</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Better with breath than I did feel myself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said: “Go on, for I am strong and bold.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upward we took our way along the crag,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which jagged was, and narrow, and difficult,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more precipitous far than that before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speaking I went, not to appear exhausted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat a voice from the next moat came forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not well adapted to articulate words.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know not what it said, though o’er the back</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I now was of the arch that passes there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he seemed moved to anger who was speaking.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was bent downward, but my living eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could not attain the bottom, for the dark;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore I: “Master, see that thou arrive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the next round, and let us descend the wall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For as from hence I hear and understand not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So I look down and nothing I distinguish.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Other response,” he said, “I make thee not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Except the doing; for the modest asking</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ought to be followed by the deed in silence.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We from the bridge descended at its head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where it connects itself with the eighth bank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then was manifest to me the Bolgia;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I beheld therein a terrible throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of serpents, and of such a monstrous kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the remembrance still congeals my blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let Libya boast no longer with her sand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For if Chelydri, Jaculi, and Phareae</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She breeds, with Cenchri and with Amphisbaena,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neither so many plagues nor so malignant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">E’er showed she with all Ethiopia,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor with whatever on the Red Sea is!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among this cruel and most dismal throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">People were running naked and affrighted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without the hope of hole or heliotrope.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They had their hands with serpents bound behind them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These riveted upon their reins the tail</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And head, and were in front of them entwined.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo! at one who was upon our side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There darted forth a serpent, which transfixed him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where the neck is knotted to the shoulders.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor ‘O’ so quickly e’er, nor ‘I’ was written,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he took fire, and burned; and ashes wholly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behoved it that in falling he became.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when he on the ground was thus destroyed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ashes drew together, and of themselves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into himself they instantly returned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even thus by the great sages ’tis confessed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The phoenix dies, and then is born again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When it approaches its five-hundredth year;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On herb or grain it feeds not in its life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But only on tears of incense and amomum,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nard and myrrh are its last winding-sheet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as he is who falls, and knows not how,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By force of demons who to earth down drag him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or other oppilation that binds man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he arises and around him looks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wholly bewildered by the mighty anguish</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he has suffered, and in looking sighs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such was that sinner after he had risen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Justice of God! O how severe it is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That blows like these in vengeance poureth down!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Guide thereafter asked him who he was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence he replied: “I rained from Tuscany</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A short time since into this cruel gorge.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bestial life, and not a human, pleased me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as the mule I was; I’m Vanni Fucci,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beast, and Pistoia was my worthy den.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I unto the Guide: “Tell him to stir not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ask what crime has thrust him here below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For once a man of blood and wrath I saw him.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sinner, who had heard, dissembled not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But unto me directed mind and face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with a melancholy shame was painted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then said: “It pains me more that thou hast caught me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amid this misery where thou seest me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than when I from the other life was taken.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What thou demandest I cannot deny;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So low am I put down because I robbed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sacristy of the fair ornaments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And falsely once ’twas laid upon another;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that thou mayst not such a sight enjoy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thou shalt e’er be out of the dark places,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine ears to my announcement ope and hear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pistoia first of Neri groweth meagre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Florence doth renew her men and manners;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mars draws a vapour up from Val di Magra,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is with turbid clouds enveloped round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with impetuous and bitter tempest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over Campo Picen shall be the battle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When it shall suddenly rend the mist asunder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that each Bianco shall thereby be smitten.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this I’ve said that it may give thee pain.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-25" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXV</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Agnello Brunelleschi, Buoso degli Abati, Puccio Sciancato, Cianfa de’ Donati, and Guercio Cavalcanti.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At the conclusion of his words, the thief</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lifted his hands aloft with both the figs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crying: “Take that, God, for at thee I aim them.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From that time forth the serpents were my friends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For one entwined itself about his neck</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if it said: “I will not thou speak more;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And round his arms another, and rebound him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Clinching itself together so in front,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with them he could not a motion make.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pistoia, ah, Pistoia! why resolve not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To burn thyself to ashes and so perish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since in ill-doing thou thy seed excellest?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all the sombre circles of this Hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spirit I saw not against God so proud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not he who fell at Thebes down from the walls!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He fled away, and spake no further word;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I beheld a Centaur full of rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come crying out: “Where is, where is the scoffer?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I do not think Maremma has so many</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Serpents as he had all along his back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As far as where our countenance begins.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the shoulders, just behind the nape,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wings wide open was a dragon lying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he sets fire to all that he encounters.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Master said: “That one is Cacus, who</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath the rock upon Mount Aventine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Created oftentimes a lake of blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He goes not on the same road with his brothers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By reason of the fraudulent theft he made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the great herd, which he had near to him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat his tortuous actions ceased beneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mace of Hercules, who peradventure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gave him a hundred, and he felt not ten.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While he was speaking thus, he had passed by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spirits three had underneath us come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which nor I aware was, nor my Leader,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until what time they shouted: “Who are you?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which account our story made a halt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then we were intent on them alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I did not know them; but it came to pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it is wont to happen by some chance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That one to name the other was compelled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exclaiming: “Where can Cianfa have remained?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence I, so that the Leader might attend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upward from chin to nose my finger laid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou art, Reader, slow now to believe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What I shall say, it will no marvel be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I who saw it hardly can admit it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I was holding raised on them my brows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behold! a serpent with six feet darts forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In front of one, and fastens wholly on him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With middle feet it bound him round the paunch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the forward ones his arms it seized;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then thrust its teeth through one cheek and the other;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hindermost it stretched upon his thighs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And put its tail through in between the two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And up behind along the reins outspread it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ivy was never fastened by its barbs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto a tree so, as this horrible reptile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the other’s limbs entwined its own.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then they stuck close, as if of heated wax</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They had been made, and intermixed their colour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor one nor other seemed now what he was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’en as proceedeth on before the flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upward along the paper a brown colour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is not black as yet, and the white dies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other two looked on, and each of them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cried out: “O me, Agnello, how thou changest!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behold, thou now art neither two nor one.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already the two heads had one become,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When there appeared to us two figures mingled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into one face, wherein the two were lost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the four lists were fashioned the two arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The thighs and legs, the belly and the chest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Members became that never yet were seen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Every original aspect there was cancelled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two and yet none did the perverted image</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Appear, and such departed with slow pace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as a lizard, under the great scourge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of days canicular, exchanging hedge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lightning appeareth if the road it cross;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus did appear, coming towards the bellies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the two others, a small fiery serpent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Livid and black as is a peppercorn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in that part whereat is first received</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our aliment, it one of them transfixed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then downward fell in front of him extended.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The one transfixed looked at it, but said naught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nay, rather with feet motionless he yawned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Just as if sleep or fever had assailed him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He at the serpent gazed, and it at him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One through the wound, the other through the mouth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Smoked violently, and the smoke commingled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Henceforth be silent Lucan, where he mentions</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wretched Sabellus and Nassidius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wait to hear what now shall be shot forth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be silent Ovid, of Cadmus and Arethusa;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For if him to a snake, her to fountain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Converts he fabling, that I grudge him not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because two natures never front to front</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has he transmuted, so that both the forms</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To interchange their matter ready were.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Together they responded in such wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to a fork the serpent cleft his tail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the wounded drew his feet together.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The legs together with the thighs themselves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adhered so, that in little time the juncture</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No sign whatever made that was apparent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He with the cloven tail assumed the figure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other one was losing, and his skin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Became elastic, and the other’s hard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw the arms draw inward at the armpits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both feet of the reptile, that were short,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lengthen as much as those contracted were.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereafter the hind feet, together twisted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Became the member that a man conceals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of his own the wretch had two created.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While both of them the exhalation veils</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a new colour, and engenders hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On one of them and depilates the other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The one uprose and down the other fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though turning not away their impious lamps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Underneath which each one his muzzle changed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who was standing drew it tow’rds the temples,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from excess of matter, which came thither,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Issued the ears from out the hollow cheeks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What did not backward run and was retained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that excess made to the face a nose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the lips thickened far as was befitting.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who lay prostrate thrusts his muzzle forward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And backward draws the ears into his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the same manner as the snail its horns;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so the tongue, which was entire and apt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For speech before, is cleft, and the bi-forked</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the other closes up, and the smoke ceases.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soul, which to a reptile had been changed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the valley hissing takes to flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after him the other speaking sputters.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then did he turn upon him his new shoulders,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said to the other: “I’ll have Buoso run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crawling as I have done, along this road.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this way I beheld the seventh ballast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shift and reshift, and here be my excuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The novelty, if aught my pen transgress.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And notwithstanding that mine eyes might be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Somewhat bewildered, and my mind dismayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They could not flee away so secretly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that I plainly saw Puccio Sciancato;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he it was who sole of three companions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which came in the beginning, was not changed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other was he whom thou, Gaville, weepest.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-26" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Eighth Bolgia: Evil Counsellors⁠—Ulysses and Diomed.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Rejoice, O Florence, since thou art so great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That over sea and land thou beatest thy wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And throughout Hell thy name is spread abroad!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the thieves five citizens of thine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like these I found, whence shame comes unto me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thou thereby to no great honour risest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if when morn is near our dreams are true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feel shalt thou in a little time from now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What Prato, if none other, craves for thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if it now were, it were not too soon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would that it were, seeing it needs must be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ’twill aggrieve me more the more I age.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We went our way, and up along the stairs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bourns had made us to descend before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remounted my Conductor and drew me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And following the solitary path</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among the rocks and ridges of the crag,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The foot without the hand sped not at all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then sorrowed I, and sorrow now again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I direct my mind to what I saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more my genius curb than I am wont,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it may run not unless virtue guide it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that if some good star, or better thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have given me good, I may myself not grudge it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As many as the hind (who on the hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rests at the time when he who lights the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His countenance keeps least concealed from us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While as the fly gives place unto the gnat)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeth the glowworms down along the valley,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perchance there where he ploughs and makes his vintage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With flames as manifold resplendent all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was the eighth Bolgia, as I grew aware</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As soon as I was where the depth appeared.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And such as he who with the bears avenged him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld Elijah’s chariot at departing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What time the steeds to heaven erect uprose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For with his eye he could not follow it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So as to see aught else than flame alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as a little cloud ascending upward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus each along the gorge of the intrenchment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was moving; for not one reveals the theft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every flame a sinner steals away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I stood upon the bridge uprisen to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that, if I had seized not on a rock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down had I fallen without being pushed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Leader, who beheld me so attent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exclaimed: “Within the fires the spirits are;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each swathes himself with that wherewith he burns.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My Master,” I replied, “by hearing thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I am more sure; but I surmised already</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It might be so, and already wished to ask thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who is within that fire, which comes so cleft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At top, it seems uprising from the pyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where was Eteocles with his brother placed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He answered me: “Within there are tormented</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ulysses and Diomed, and thus together</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They unto vengeance run as unto wrath.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there within their flame do they lament</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ambush of the horse, which made the door</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence issued forth the Romans’ gentle seed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therein is wept the craft, for which being dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deidamia still deplores Achilles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pain for the Palladium there is borne.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If they within those sparks possess the power</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To speak,” I said, “thee, Master, much I pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And re-pray, that the prayer be worth a thousand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou make no denial of awaiting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until the horned flame shall hither come;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou seest that with desire I lean towards it.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “Worthy is thy entreaty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of much applause, and therefore I accept it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But take heed that thy tongue restrain itself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leave me to speak, because I have conceived</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That which thou wishest; for they might disdain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perchance, since they were Greeks, discourse of thine.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When now the flame had come unto that point,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where to my Leader it seemed time and place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After this fashion did I hear him speak:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O ye, who are twofold within one fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If I deserved of you, while I was living,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If I deserved of you or much or little</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When in the world I wrote the lofty verses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do not move on, but one of you declare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whither, being lost, he went away to die.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then of the antique flame the greater horn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Murmuring, began to wave itself about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as a flame doth which the wind fatigues.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereafterward, the summit to and fro</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Moving as if it were the tongue that spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It uttered forth a voice, and said: “When I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Circe had departed, who concealed me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More than a year there near unto Gaeta,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ever yet Aeneas named it so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor fondness for my son, nor reverence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For my old father, nor the due affection</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which joyous should have made Penelope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could overcome within me the desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I had to be experienced of the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the vice and virtue of mankind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I put forth on the high open sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With one sole ship, and that small company</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which I never had deserted been.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both of the shores I saw as far as Spain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far as Morocco, and the isle of Sardes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the others which that sea bathes round about.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I and my company were old and slow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When at that narrow passage we arrived</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Hercules his landmarks set as signals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That man no farther onward should adventure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the right hand behind me left I Seville,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on the other already had left Ceuta.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘O brothers, who amid a hundred thousand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perils,’ I said, ‘have come unto the West,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To this so inconsiderable vigil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is remaining of your senses still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be ye unwilling to deny the knowledge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Following the sun, of the unpeopled world.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Consider ye the seed from which ye sprang;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye were not made to live like unto brutes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for pursuit of virtue and of knowledge.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So eager did I render my companions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With this brief exhortation, for the voyage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That then I hardly could have held them back.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And having turned our stern unto the morning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We of the oars made wings for our mad flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Evermore gaining on the larboard side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already all the stars of the other pole</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The night beheld, and ours so very low</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It did not rise above the ocean floor.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Five times rekindled and as many quenched</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had been the splendour underneath the moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since we had entered into the deep pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When there appeared to us a mountain, dim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From distance, and it seemed to me so high</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I had never any one beheld.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Joyful were we, and soon it turned to weeping;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For out of the new land a whirlwind rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And smote upon the fore part of the ship.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three times it made her whirl with all the waters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At the fourth time it made the stern uplift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the prow downward go, as pleased Another,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until the sea above us closed again.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-27" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVII</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Guido da Montefeltro.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Already was the flame erect and quiet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To speak no more, and now departed from us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the permission of the gentle Poet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When yet another, which behind it came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Caused us to turn our eyes upon its top</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By a confused sound that issued from it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the Sicilian bull (that bellowed first</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the lament of him, and that was right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with his file had modulated it)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bellowed so with the voice of the afflicted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, notwithstanding it was made of brass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still it appeared with agony transfixed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus, by not having any way or issue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At first from out the fire, to its own language</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Converted were the melancholy words.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But afterwards, when they had gathered way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up through the point, giving it that vibration</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The tongue had given them in their passage out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We heard it said: “O thou, at whom I aim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My voice, and who but now wast speaking Lombard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying, ‘Now go thy way, no more I urge thee,’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because I come perchance a little late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stay and speak with me let it not irk thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou seest it irks not me, and I am burning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou but lately into this blind world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hast fallen down from that sweet Latian land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefrom I bring the whole of my transgression,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say, if the Romagnuols have peace or war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I was from the mountains there between</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Urbino and the yoke whence Tiber bursts.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I still was downward bent and listening,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When my Conductor touched me on the side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying: “Speak thou: this one a Latian is.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, who had beforehand my reply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In readiness, forthwith began to speak:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“O soul, that down below there art concealed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Romagna thine is not and never has been</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without war in the bosom of its tyrants;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But open war I none have left there now.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ravenna stands as it long years has stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Eagle of Polenta there is brooding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that she covers Cervia with her vans.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The city which once made the long resistance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the French a sanguinary heap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath the Green Paws finds itself again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Verrucchio’s ancient Mastiff and the new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who made such bad disposal of Montagna,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they are wont make wimbles of their teeth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cities of Lamone and Santerno</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Governs the Lioncel of the white lair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who changes sides ’twixt summertime and winter;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that of which the Savio bathes the flank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as it lies between the plain and mountain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lives between tyranny and a free state.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now I entreat thee tell us who thou art;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be not more stubborn than the rest have been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So may thy name hold front there in the world.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the fire a little more had roared</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In its own fashion, the sharp point it moved</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This way and that, and then gave forth such breath:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If I believed that my reply were made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To one who to the world would e’er return,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This flame without more flickering would stand still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But inasmuch as never from this depth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did any one return, if I hear true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without the fear of infamy I answer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was a man of arms, then Cordelier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Believing thus begirt to make amends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And truly my belief had been fulfilled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for the High Priest, whom may ill betide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who put me back into my former sins;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how and wherefore I will have thee hear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While I was still the form of bone and pulp</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My mother gave to me, the deeds I did</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were not those of a lion, but a fox.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The machinations and the covert ways</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I knew them all, and practised so their craft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the ends of earth the sound went forth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When now unto that portion of mine age</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw myself arrived, when each one ought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lower the sails, and coil away the ropes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That which before had pleased me then displeased me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And penitent and confessing I surrendered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah woe is me! and it would have bestead me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Leader of the modern Pharisees</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having a war near unto Lateran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And not with Saracens nor with the Jews,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For each one of his enemies was Christian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And none of them had been to conquer Acre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor merchandising in the Sultan’s land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor the high office, nor the sacred orders,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In him regarded, nor in me that cord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which used to make those girt with it more meagre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But even as Constantine sought out Sylvester</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To cure his leprosy, within Soracte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So this one sought me out as an adept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cure him of the fever of his pride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Counsel he asked of me, and I was silent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because his words appeared inebriate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then he said: ‘Be not thy heart afraid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Henceforth I thee absolve; and thou instruct me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How to raze Palestrina to the ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaven have I power to lock and to unlock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As thou dost know; therefore the keys are two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which my predecessor held not dear.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then urged me on his weighty arguments</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There, where my silence was the worst advice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said I: ‘Father, since thou washest me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that sin into which I now must fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The promise long with the fulfilment short</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will make thee triumph in thy lofty seat.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Francis came afterward, when I was dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For me; but one of the black Cherubim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said to him: ‘Take him not; do me no wrong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He must come down among my servitors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because he gave the fraudulent advice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From which time forth I have been at his hair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For who repents not cannot be absolved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor can one both repent and will at once,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because of the contradiction which consents not.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O miserable me! how I did shudder</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When he seized on me, saying: ‘Peradventure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou didst not think that I was a logician!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He bore me unto Minos, who entwined</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eight times his tail about his stubborn back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after he had bitten it in great rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said: ‘Of the thievish fire a culprit this;’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore, here where thou seest, am I lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vested thus in going I bemoan me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When it had thus completed its recital,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flame departed uttering lamentations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Writhing and flapping its sharp-pointed horn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onward we passed, both I and my Conductor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up o’er the crag above another arch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which the moat covers, where is paid the fee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By those who, sowing discord, win their burden.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-28" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVIII</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Ninth Bolgia: Schismatics⁠—Mahomet and Ali⁠—Pier da Medicina, Curio, Mosca, and Bertrand de Born.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Who ever could, e’en with untrammelled words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell of the blood and of the wounds in full</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which now I saw, by many times narrating?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each tongue would for a certainty fall short</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By reason of our speech and memory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That have small room to comprehend so much.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If were again assembled all the people</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which formerly upon the fateful land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Puglia were lamenting for their blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shed by the Romans and the lingering war</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of the rings made such illustrious spoils,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Livy has recorded, who errs not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With those who felt the agony of blows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By making counterstand to Robert Guiscard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the rest, whose bones are gathered still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Ceperano, where a renegade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was each Apulian, and at Tagliacozzo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where without arms the old Alardo conquered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one his limb transpierced, and one lopped off,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should show, it would be nothing to compare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the disgusting mode of the ninth Bolgia.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A cask by losing centrepiece or cant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was never shattered so, as I saw one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rent from the chin to where one breaketh wind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between his legs were hanging down his entrails;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His heart was visible, and the dismal sack</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That maketh excrement of what is eaten.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While I was all absorbed in seeing him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He looked at me, and opened with his hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His bosom, saying: “See now how I rend me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How mutilated, see, is Mahomet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In front of me doth Ali weeping go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cleft in the face from forelock unto chin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the others whom thou here beholdest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disseminators of scandal and of schism</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While living were, and therefore are cleft thus.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A devil is behind here, who doth cleave us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus cruelly, unto the falchion’s edge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Putting again each one of all this ream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we have gone around the doleful road;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By reason that our wounds are closed again</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere any one in front of him repass.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But who art thou, that musest on the crag,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perchance to postpone going to the pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is adjudged upon thine accusations?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nor death hath reached him yet, nor guilt doth bring him,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Master made reply, “to be tormented;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to procure him full experience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me, who am dead, behoves it to conduct him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down here through Hell, from circle unto circle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this is true as that I speak to thee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than a hundred were there when they heard him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who in the moat stood still to look at me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through wonderment oblivious of their torture.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now say to Fra Dolcino, then, to arm him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou, who perhaps wilt shortly see the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If soon he wish not here to follow me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So with provisions, that no stress of snow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May give the victory to the Novarese,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which otherwise to gain would not be easy.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After one foot to go away he lifted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This word did Mahomet say unto me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then to depart upon the ground he stretched it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another one, who had his throat pierced through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nose cut off close underneath the brows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And had no longer but a single ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Staying to look in wonder with the others,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before the others did his gullet open,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which outwardly was red in every part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said: “O thou, whom guilt doth not condemn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whom I once saw up in Latian land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unless too great similitude deceive me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call to remembrance Pier da Medicina,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If e’er thou see again the lovely plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from Vercelli slopes to Marcabo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make it known to the best two of Fano,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Messer Guido and Angiolello likewise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That if foreseeing here be not in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cast over from their vessel shall they be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drowned near unto the Cattolica,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the betrayal of a tyrant fell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between the isles of Cyprus and Majorca</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Neptune ne’er yet beheld so great a crime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Neither of pirates nor Argolic people.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That traitor, who sees only with one eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And holds the land, which someone here with me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would fain be fasting from the vision of,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will make them come unto a parley with him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then will do so, that to Focara’s wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They will not stand in need of vow or prayer.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I to him: “Show to me and declare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thou wouldst have me bear up news of thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who is this person of the bitter vision.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then did he lay his hand upon the jaw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of one of his companions, and his mouth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oped, crying: “This is he, and he speaks not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This one, being banished, every doubt submerged</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Caesar by affirming the forearmed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Always with detriment allowed delay.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O how bewildered unto me appeared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With tongue asunder in his windpipe slit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Curio, who in speaking was so bold!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one, who both his hands dissevered had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The stumps uplifting through the murky air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the blood made horrible his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cried out: “Thou shalt remember Mosca also,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who said, alas! ‘A thing done has an end!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was an ill seed for the Tuscan people.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And death unto thy race,” thereto I added;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence he, accumulating woe on woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Departed, like a person sad and crazed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I remained to look upon the crowd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw a thing which I should be afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without some further proof, even to recount,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If it were not that conscience reassures me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That good companion which emboldens man</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath the hauberk of its feeling pure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I truly saw, and still I seem to see it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A trunk without a head walk in like manner</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As walked the others of the mournful herd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by the hair it held the head dissevered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hung from the hand in fashion of a lantern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that upon us gazed and said: “O me!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It of itself made to itself a lamp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they were two in one, and one in two;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How that can be, He knows who so ordains it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When it was come close to the bridge’s foot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It lifted high its arm with all the head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bring more closely unto us its words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which were: “Behold now the sore penalty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou, who dost breathing go the dead beholding;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behold if any be as great as this.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so that thou may carry news of me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Know that Bertram de Born am I, the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who gave to the Young King the evil comfort.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I made the father and the son rebellious;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Achitophel not more with Absalom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And David did with his accursed goadings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because I parted persons so united,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Parted do I now bear my brain, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From its beginning, which is in this trunk.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus is observed in me the counterpoise.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-29" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Tenth Bolgia: Alchemists⁠—Griffolino d’ Arezzo and Capocchio.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The many people and the divers wounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These eyes of mine had so inebriated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they were wishful to stand still and weep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But said Virgilius: “What dost thou still gaze at?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why is thy sight still riveted down there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among the mournful, mutilated shades?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast not done so at the other Bolge;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Consider, if to count them thou believest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That two-and-twenty miles the valley winds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now the moon is underneath our feet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Henceforth the time allotted us is brief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more is to be seen than what thou seest.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If thou hadst,” I made answer thereupon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Attended to the cause for which I looked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps a longer stay thou wouldst have pardoned.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meanwhile my Guide departed, and behind him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I went, already making my reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And superadding: “In that cavern where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I held mine eyes with such attention fixed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I think a spirit of my blood laments</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sin which down below there costs so much.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then said the Master: “Be no longer broken</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy thought from this time forward upon him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Attend elsewhere, and there let him remain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For him I saw below the little bridge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pointing at thee, and threatening with his finger</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fiercely, and heard him called Geri del Bello.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So wholly at that time wast thou impeded</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By him who formerly held Altaforte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou didst not look that way; so he departed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O my Conductor, his own violent death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is not yet avenged for him,” I said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“By any who is sharer in the shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made him disdainful; whence he went away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I imagine, without speaking to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thereby made me pity him the more.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus did we speak as far as the first place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the crag, which the next valley shows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down to the bottom, if there were more light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we were now right over the last cloister</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Malebolge, so that its lay-brothers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could manifest themselves unto our sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Divers lamentings pierced me through and through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with compassion had their arrows barbed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat mine ears I covered with my hands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What pain would be, if from the hospitals</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Valdichiana, ’twixt July and September,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of Maremma and Sardinia</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the diseases in one moat were gathered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such was it here, and such a stench came from it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As from putrescent limbs is wont to issue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We had descended on the furthest bank</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the long crag, upon the left hand still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then more vivid was my power of sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down tow’rds the bottom, where the ministress</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the high Lord, Justice infallible,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Punishes forgers, which she here records.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I do not think a sadder sight to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was in Aegina the whole people sick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(When was the air so full of pestilence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The animals, down to the little worm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All fell, and afterwards the ancient people,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">According as the poets have affirmed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were from the seed of ants restored again,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than was it to behold through that dark valley</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The spirits languishing in divers heaps.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This on the belly, that upon the back</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One of the other lay, and others crawling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shifted themselves along the dismal road.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We step by step went onward without speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gazing upon and listening to the sick</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who had not strength enough to lift their bodies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw two sitting leaned against each other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As leans in heating platter against platter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From head to foot bespotted o’er with scabs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never saw I plied a currycomb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By stableboy for whom his master waits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or him who keeps awake unwillingly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As everyone was plying fast the bite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of nails upon himself, for the great rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of itching which no other succour had.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the nails downward with them dragged the scab,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In fashion as a knife the scales of bream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or any other fish that has them largest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O thou, that with thy fingers dost dismail thee,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began my Leader unto one of them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“And makest of them pincers now and then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me if any Latian is with those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who are herein; so may thy nails suffice thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To all eternity unto this work.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Latians are we, whom thou so wasted seest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both of us here,” one weeping made reply;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“But who art thou, that questionest about us?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said the Guide: “One am I who descends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down with this living man from cliff to cliff,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I intend to show Hell unto him.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then broken was their mutual support,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trembling each one turned himself to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With others who had heard him by rebound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wholly to me did the good Master gather,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying: “Say unto them whate’er thou wishest.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I began, since he would have it so:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“So may your memory not steal away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the first world from out the minds of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But so may it survive ’neath many suns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say to me who ye are, and of what people;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let not your foul and loathsome punishment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make you afraid to show yourselves to me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I of Arezzo was,” one made reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“And Albert of Siena had me burned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what I died for does not bring me here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis true I said to him, speaking in jest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I could rise by flight into the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he who had conceit, but little wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would have me show to him the art; and only</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because no Daedalus I made him, made me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be burned by one who held him as his son.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But unto the last Bolgia of the ten,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For alchemy, which in the world I practised,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Minos, who cannot err, has me condemned.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the Poet said I: “Now was ever</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So vain a people as the Sienese?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not for a certainty the French by far.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat the other leper, who had heard me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Replied unto my speech: “Taking out Stricca,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who knew the art of moderate expenses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Niccolo, who the luxurious use</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of cloves discovered earliest of all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within that garden where such seed takes root;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And taking out the band, among whom squandered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Caccia d’Ascian his vineyards and vast woods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And where his wit the Abbagliato proffered!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, that thou know who thus doth second thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the Sienese, make sharp thine eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tow’rds me, so that my face well answer thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou shalt see I am Capocchio’s shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who metals falsified by alchemy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou must remember, if I well descry thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How I a skilful ape of nature was.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-30" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXX</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Other Falsifiers or Forgers⁠—Gianni Schicchi, Myrrha, Adam of Brescia, Potiphar’s Wife, and Sinon of Troy.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Twas at the time when Juno was enraged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Semele, against the Theban blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As she already more than once had shown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So reft of reason Athamas became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, seeing his own wife with children twain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Walking encumbered upon either hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He cried: “Spread out the nets, that I may take</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lioness and her whelps upon the passage;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then extended his unpitying claws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seizing the first, who had the name Learchus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whirled him round, and dashed him on a rock;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she, with the other burden, drowned herself;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the time when fortune downward hurled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Trojan’s arrogance, that all things dared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the king was with his kingdom crushed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hecuba sad, disconsolate, and captive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When lifeless she beheld Polyxena,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of her Polydorus on the shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ocean was the dolorous one aware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of her senses like a dog she barked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much the anguish had her mind distorted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But not of Thebes the furies nor the Trojan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were ever seen in any one so cruel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In goading beasts, and much more human members,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I beheld two shadows pale and naked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, biting, in the manner ran along</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That a boar does, when from the sty turned loose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One to Capocchio came, and by the nape</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seized with its teeth his neck, so that in dragging</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It made his belly grate the solid bottom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Aretine, who trembling had remained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said to me: “That mad sprite is Gianni Schicchi,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And raving goes thus harrying other people.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O,” said I to him, “so may not the other</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Set teeth on thee, let it not weary thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell us who it is, ere it dart hence.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “That is the ancient ghost</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the nefarious Myrrha, who became</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beyond all rightful love her father’s lover.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She came to sin with him after this manner,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By counterfeiting of another’s form;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he who goeth yonder undertook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he might gain the lady of the herd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To counterfeit in himself Buoso Donati,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Making a will and giving it due form.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after the two maniacs had passed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On whom I held mine eye, I turned it back</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To look upon the other evil-born.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw one made in fashion of a lute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If he had only had the groin cut off</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Just at the point at which a man is forked.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heavy dropsy, that so disproportions</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The limbs with humours, which it ill concocts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the face corresponds not to the belly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Compelled him so to hold his lips apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As does the hectic, who because of thirst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One tow’rds the chin, the other upward turns.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O ye, who without any torment are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And why I know not, in the world of woe,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He said to us, “behold, and be attentive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the misery of Master Adam;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I had while living much of what I wished,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now, alas! a drop of water crave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rivulets, that from the verdant hills</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Cassentin descend down into Arno,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Making their channels to be cold and moist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever before me stand, and not in vain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For far more doth their image dry me up</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than the disease which strips my face of flesh.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rigid justice that chastises me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Draweth occasion from the place in which</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I sinned, to put the more my sighs in flight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is Romena, where I counterfeited</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The currency imprinted with the Baptist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which I left my body burned above.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if I here could see the tristful soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Guido, or Alessandro, or their brother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Branda’s fount I would not give the sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One is within already, if the raving</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shades that are going round about speak truth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what avails it me, whose limbs are tied?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I were only still so light, that in</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A hundred years I could advance one inch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I had already started on the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeking him out among this squalid folk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Although the circuit be eleven miles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And be not less than half a mile across.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For them am I in such a family;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They did induce me into coining florins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which had three carats of impurity.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I to him: “Who are the two poor wretches</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That smoke like unto a wet hand in winter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lying there close upon thy right-hand confines?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I found them here,” replied he, “when I rained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into this chasm, and since they have not turned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor do I think they will for evermore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One the false woman is who accused Joseph,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other the false Sinon, Greek of Troy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From acute fever they send forth such reek.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one of them, who felt himself annoyed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At being, peradventure, named so darkly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Smote with the fist upon his hardened paunch.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It gave a sound, as if it were a drum;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Master Adam smote him in the face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With arm that did not seem to be less hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saying to him: “Although be taken from me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All motion, for my limbs that heavy are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have an arm unfettered for such need.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat he answer made: “When thou didst go</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the fire, thou hadst it not so ready:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But hadst it so and more when thou wast coining.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dropsical: “Thou sayest true in that;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thou wast not so true a witness there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where thou wast questioned of the truth at Troy.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If I spake false, thou falsifiedst the coin,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said Sinon; “and for one fault I am here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thou for more than any other demon.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Remember, perjurer, about the horse,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He made reply who had the swollen belly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“And rueful be it thee the whole world knows it.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Rueful to thee the thirst be wherewith cracks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy tongue,” the Greek said, “and the putrid water</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hedges so thy paunch before thine eyes.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then the false-coiner: “So is gaping wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy mouth for speaking evil, as ’tis wont;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because if I have thirst, and humour stuff me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast the burning and the head that aches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to lick up the mirror of Narcissus</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou wouldst not want words many to invite thee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In listening to them was I wholly fixed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When said the Master to me: “Now just look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For little wants it that I quarrel with thee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When him I heard in anger speak to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I turned me round towards him with such shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That still it eddies through my memory.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as he is who dreams of his own harm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who dreaming wishes it may be a dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that he craves what is, as if it were not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such I became, not having power to speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to excuse myself I wished, and still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Excused myself, and did not think I did it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Less shame doth wash away a greater fault,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Master said, “than this of thine has been;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore thyself disburden of all sadness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make account that I am aye beside thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If e’er it come to pass that fortune bring thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where there are people in a like dispute;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For a base wish it is to wish to hear it.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-31" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Giants, Nimrod, Ephialtes, and Antaeus.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>One and the selfsame tongue first wounded me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that it tinged the one cheek and the other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then held out to me the medicine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus do I hear that once Achilles’ spear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His and his father’s, used to be the cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First of a sad and then a gracious boon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We turned our backs upon the wretched valley,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the bank that girds it round about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Going across it without any speech.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There it was less than night, and less than day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that my sight went little in advance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I could hear the blare of a loud horn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So loud it would have made each thunder faint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, counter to it following its way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mine eyes directed wholly to one place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the dolorous discomfiture</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Charlemagne the holy emprise lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So terribly Orlando sounded not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Short while my head turned thitherward I held</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When many lofty towers I seemed to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat I: “Master, say, what town is this?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “Because thou peerest forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Athwart the darkness at too great a distance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It happens that thou errest in thy fancy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well shalt thou see, if thou arrivest there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How much the sense deceives itself by distance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore a little faster spur thee on.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then tenderly he took me by the hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said: “Before we farther have advanced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the reality may seem to thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Less strange, know that these are not towers, but giants,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they are in the well, around the bank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From navel downward, one and all of them.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As, when the fog is vanishing away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Little by little doth the sight refigure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whate’er the mist that crowds the air conceals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, piercing through the dense and darksome air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More and more near approaching tow’rd the verge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My error fled, and fear came over me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because as on its circular parapets</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Montereggione crowns itself with towers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">E’en thus the margin which surrounds the well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With one half of their bodies turreted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The horrible giants, whom Jove menaces</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">E’en now from out the heavens when he thunders.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I of one already saw the face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shoulders, and breast, and great part of the belly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And down along his sides both of the arms.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Certainly Nature, when she left the making</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of animals like these, did well indeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By taking such executors from Mars;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if of elephants and whales she doth not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Repent her, whosoever looketh subtly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More just and more discreet will hold her for it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For where the argument of intellect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is added unto evil will and power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No rampart can the people make against it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His face appeared to me as long and large</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As is at Rome the pine-cone of Saint Peter’s,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in proportion were the other bones;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that the margin, which an apron was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down from the middle, showed so much of him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above it, that to reach up to his hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three Frieslanders in vain had vaunted them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I beheld thirty great palms of him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down from the place where man his mantle buckles.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Raphael mai amech izabi almi,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began to clamour the ferocious mouth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which were not befitting sweeter psalms.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unto him my Guide: “Soul idiotic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Keep to thy horn, and vent thyself with that,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When wrath or other passion touches thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Search round thy neck, and thou wilt find the belt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which keeps it fastened, O bewildered soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And see it, where it bars thy mighty breast.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then said to me: “He doth himself accuse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This one is Nimrod, by whose evil thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One language in the world is not still used.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here let us leave him and not speak in vain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For even such to him is every language</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As his to others, which to none is known.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore a longer journey did we make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turned to the left, and a crossbow-shot oft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We found another far more fierce and large.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In binding him, who might the master be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I cannot say; but he had pinioned close</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behind the right arm, and in front the other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With chains, that held him so begirt about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the neck down, that on the part uncovered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It wound itself as far as the fifth gyre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“This proud one wished to make experiment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his own power against the Supreme Jove,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Leader said, “whence he has such a guerdon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ephialtes is his name; he showed great prowess.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What time the giants terrified the gods;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The arms he wielded never more he moves.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I to him: “If possible, I should wish</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of the measureless Briareus</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These eyes of mine might have experience.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence he replied: “Thou shalt behold Antaeus</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Close by here, who can speak and is unbound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who at the bottom of all crime shall place us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much farther yon is he whom thou wouldst see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he is bound, and fashioned like to this one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save that he seems in aspect more ferocious.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There never was an earthquake of such might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it could shake a tower so violently,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Ephialtes suddenly shook himself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then was I more afraid of death than ever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nothing more was needful than the fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If I had not beheld the manacles.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then we proceeded farther in advance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to Antaeus came, who, full five ells</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without the head, forth issued from the cavern.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O thou, who in the valley fortunate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Scipio the heir of glory made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Hannibal turned back with all his hosts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once brought’st a thousand lions for thy prey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And who, hadst thou been at the mighty war</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among thy brothers, some it seems still think</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sons of Earth the victory would have gained:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Place us below, nor be disdainful of it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where the cold doth lock Cocytus up.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make us not go to Tityus nor Typhoeus;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This one can give of that which here is longed for;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore stoop down, and do not curl thy lip.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still in the world can he restore thy fame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because he lives, and still expects long life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If to itself Grace call him not untimely.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So said the Master; and in haste the other</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hands extended and took up my Guide⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hands whose great pressure Hercules once felt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Virgilius, when he felt himself embraced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said unto me: “Draw nigh, that I may take thee;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then of himself and me one bundle made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As seems the Carisenda, to behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath the leaning side, when goes a cloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above it so that opposite it hangs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such did Antaeus seem to me, who stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Watching to see him stoop, and then it was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I could have wished to go some other way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But lightly in the abyss, which swallows up</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Judas with Lucifer, he put us down;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor thus bowed downward made he there delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, as a mast does in a ship, uprose.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-32" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXII</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Ninth Circle: the Frozen Lake of Cocytus⁠—First Division, Caïna: Traitors to their Kindred⁠—Camicion de’ Pazzi⁠—Second Division, Antenora: Traitors to their Country⁠—Bocca degli Abati and Buoso da Duera.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If I had rhymes both rough and stridulous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As were appropriate to the dismal hole</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down upon which thrust all the other rocks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would press out the juice of my conception</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More fully; but because I have them not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not without fear I bring myself to speak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ’tis no enterprise to take in jest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sketch the bottom of all the universe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor for a tongue that cries Mamma and Babbo.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But may those Ladies help this verse of mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who helped Amphion in enclosing Thebes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from the fact the word be not diverse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O rabble ill-begotten above all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who’re in the place to speak of which is hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twere better ye had here been sheep or goats!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we were down within the darksome well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath the giant’s feet, but lower far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I was scanning still the lofty wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I heard it said to me: “Look how thou steppest!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Take heed thou do not trample with thy feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heads of the tired, miserable brothers!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat I turned me round, and saw before me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And underfoot a lake, that from the frost</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The semblance had of glass, and not of water.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thick a veil ne’er made upon its current</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In wintertime Danube in Austria,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor there beneath the frigid sky the Don,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As there was here; so that if Tambernich</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had fallen upon it, or Pietrapana,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">E’en at the edge ’twould not have given a creak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as to croak the frog doth place himself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With muzzle out of water⁠—when is dreaming</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of gleaning oftentimes the peasant-girl⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Livid, as far down as where shame appears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were the disconsolate shades within the ice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Setting their teeth unto the note of storks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each one his countenance held downward bent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From mouth the cold, from eyes the doleful heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among them witness of itself procures.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When round about me somewhat I had looked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I downward turned me, and saw two so close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hair upon their heads together mingled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ye who so strain your breasts together, tell me,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I said, “who are you;” and they bent their necks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when to me their faces they had lifted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their eyes, which first were only moist within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gushed o’er the eyelids, and the frost congealed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The tears between, and locked them up again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clamp never bound together wood with wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So strongly; whereat they, like two he-goats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Butted together, so much wrath o’ercame them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one, who had by reason of the cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lost both his ears, still with his visage downward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said: “Why dost thou so mirror thyself in us?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou desire to know who these two are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The valley whence Bisenzio descends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Belonged to them and to their father Albert.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They from one body came, and all Caina</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou shalt search through, and shalt not find a shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More worthy to be fixed in gelatine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not he in whom were broken breast and shadow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At one and the same blow by Arthur’s hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Focaccia not; not he who me encumbers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So with his head I see no farther forward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bore the name of Sassol Mascheroni;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well knowest thou who he was, if thou art Tuscan.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that thou put me not to further speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Know that I Camicion de’ Pazzi was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wait Carlino to exonerate me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then I beheld a thousand faces, made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Purple with cold; whence o’er me comes a shudder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore will come, at frozen ponds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And while we were advancing tow’rds the middle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where everything of weight unites together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I was shivering in the eternal shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether ’twere will, or destiny, or chance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I know not; but in walking ’mong the heads</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I struck my foot hard in the face of one.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weeping he growled: “Why dost thou trample me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unless thou comest to increase the vengeance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">of Montaperti, why dost thou molest me?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I: “My Master, now wait here for me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I through him may issue from a doubt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then thou mayst hurry me, as thou shalt wish.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Leader stopped; and to that one I said</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who was blaspheming vehemently still:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Who art thou, that thus reprehendest others?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now who art thou, that goest through Antenora</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Smiting,” replied he, “other people’s cheeks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that, if thou wert living, ’twere too much?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Living I am, and dear to thee it may be,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was my response, “if thou demandest fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ’mid the other notes thy name I place.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “For the reverse I long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Take thyself hence, and give me no more trouble;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ill thou knowest to flatter in this hollow.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then by the scalp behind I seized upon him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said: “It must needs be thou name thyself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or not a hair remain upon thee here.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence he to me: “Though thou strip off my hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will not tell thee who I am, nor show thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If on my head a thousand times thou fall.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had his hair in hand already twisted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more than one shock of it had pulled out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He barking, with his eyes held firmly down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When cried another: “What doth ail thee, Bocca?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is’t not enough to clatter with thy jaws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thou must bark? what devil touches thee?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now,” said I, “I care not to have thee speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Accursed traitor; for unto thy shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will report of thee veracious news.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Begone,” replied he, “and tell what thou wilt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But be not silent, if thou issue hence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of him who had just now his tongue so prompt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He weepeth here the silver of the French;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">‘I saw,’ thus canst thou phrase it, ‘him of Duera</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where the sinners stand out in the cold.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou shouldst questioned be who else was there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou hast beside thee him of Beccaria,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom the gorget Florence slit asunder;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gianni del Soldanier, I think, may be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yonder with Ganellon, and Tebaldello</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who oped Faenza when the people slep.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already we had gone away from him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I beheld two frozen in one hole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that one head a hood was to the other;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even as bread through hunger is devoured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The uppermost on the other set his teeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where the brain is to the nape united.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not in another fashion Tydeus gnawed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The temples of Menalippus in disdain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than that one did the skull and the other things.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O thou, who showest by such bestial sign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy hatred against him whom thou art eating,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell me the wherefore,” said I, “with this compact,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That if thou rightfully of him complain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In knowing who ye are, and his transgression,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I in the world above repay thee for it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that wherewith I speak be not dried up.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-33" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIII</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Count Ugolino and the Archbishop Ruggieri⁠—Third Division of the Ninth Circle, Ptolomæa: Traitors to their Friends⁠—Friar Alberigo, Branco d’ Oria.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>His mouth uplifted from his grim repast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sinner, wiping it upon the hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the same head that he behind had wasted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he began: “Thou wilt that I renew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The desperate grief, which wrings my heart already</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To think of only, ere I speak of it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if my words be seed that may bear fruit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of infamy to the traitor whom I gnaw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Speaking and weeping shalt thou see together.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know not who thou art, nor by what mode</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou hast come down here; but a Florentine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou seemest to me truly, when I hear thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast to know I was Count Ugolino,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this one was Ruggieri the Archbishop;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now I will tell thee why I am such a neighbour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, by effect of his malicious thoughts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trusting in him I was made prisoner,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after put to death, I need not say;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ne’ertheless what thou canst not have heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is to say, how cruel was my death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hear shalt thou, and shalt know if he has wronged me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A narrow perforation in the mew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which bears because of me the title of Famine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in which others still must be locked up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had shown me through its opening many moons</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Already, when I dreamed the evil dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of the future rent for me the veil.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This one appeared to me as lord and master,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hunting the wolf and whelps upon the mountain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which the Pisans cannot Lucca see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sleuthhounds gaunt, and eager, and well trained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gualandi with Sismondi and Lanfianchi</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had sent out before him to the front.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After brief course seemed unto me forespent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The father and the sons, and with sharp tushes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It seemed to me I saw their flanks ripped open.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I before the morrow was awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Moaning amid their sleep I heard my sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with me were, and asking after bread.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cruel indeed art thou, if yet thou grieve not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thinking of what my heart foreboded me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And weep’st thou not, what art thou wont to weep at?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They were awake now, and the hour drew nigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At which our food used to be brought to us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through his dream was each one apprehensive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I heard locking up the under door</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the horrible tower; whereat without a word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I gazed into the faces of my sons.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wept not, I within so turned to stone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They wept; and darling little Anselm mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said: ‘Thou dost gaze so, father, what doth ail thee?’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still not a tear I shed, nor answer made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All of that day, nor yet the night thereafter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until another sun rose on the world.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As now a little glimmer made its way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the dolorous prison, and I saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon four faces my own very aspect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both of my hands in agony I bit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, thinking that I did it from desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of eating, on a sudden they uprose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said they: ‘Father, much less pain ’twill give us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thou do eat of us; thyself didst clothe us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With this poor flesh, and do thou strip it off.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I calmed me then, not to make them more sad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That day we all were silent, and the next.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah! obdurate earth, wherefore didst thou not open?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we had come unto the fourth day, Gaddo</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threw himself down outstretched before my feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying, ‘My father, why dost thou not help me?’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there he died; and, as thou seest me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw the three fall, one by one, between</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fifth day and the sixth; whence I betook me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already blind, to groping over each,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And three days called them after they were dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then hunger did what sorrow could not do.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he had said this, with his eyes distorted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wretched skull resumed he with his teeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, as a dog’s, upon the bone were strong.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! Pisa, thou opprobrium of the people</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the fair land there where the ‘Si’ doth sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since slow to punish thee thy neighbours are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let the Capraia and Gorgona move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make a hedge across the mouth of Arno</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every person in thee it may drown!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For if Count Ugolino had the fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of having in thy castles thee betrayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou shouldst not on such cross have put his sons.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Guiltless of any crime, thou modern Thebes!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their youth made Uguccione and Brigata,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the other two my song doth name above!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We passed still farther onward, where the ice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another people ruggedly enswathes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not downward turned, but all of them reversed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weeping itself there does not let them weep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And grief that finds a barrier in the eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turns itself inward to increase the anguish;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because the earliest tears a cluster form,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, in the manner of a crystal visor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fill all the cup beneath the eyebrow full.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And notwithstanding that, as in a callus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because of cold all sensibility</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its station had abandoned in my face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still it appeared to me I felt some wind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence I: “My Master, who sets this in motion?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not below here every vapour quenched?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence he to me: “Full soon shalt thou be where</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thine eye shall answer make to thee of this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing the cause which raineth down the blast.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one of the wretches of the frozen crust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cried out to us: “O souls so merciless</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the last post is given unto you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lift from mine eyes the rigid veils, that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May vent the sorrow which impregns my heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little, e’er the weeping recongeal.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence I to him: “If thou wouldst have me help thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Say who thou wast; and if I free thee not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May I go to the bottom of the ice.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he replied: “I am Friar Alberigo;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He am I of the fruit of the bad garden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who here a date am getting for my fig.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O,” said I to him, “now art thou, too, dead?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he to me: “How may my body fare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up in the world, no knowledge I possess.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such an advantage has this Ptolomaea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That oftentimes the soul descendeth here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sooner than Atropos in motion sets it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, that thou mayest more willingly remove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From off my countenance these glassy tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Know that as soon as any soul betrays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I have done, his body by a demon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is taken from him, who thereafter rules it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until his time has wholly been revolved.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Itself down rushes into such a cistern;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And still perchance above appears the body</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of yonder shade, that winters here behind me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This thou shouldst know, if thou hast just come down;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is Ser Branca d’ Oria, and many years</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have passed away since he was thus locked up.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I think,” said I to him, “thou dost deceive me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Branca d’ Oria is not dead as yet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eats, and drinks, and sleeps, and puts on clothes.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“In moat above,” said he, “of Malebranche,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where is boiling the tenacious pitch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As yet had Michel Zanche not arrived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When this one left a devil in his stead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his own body and one near of kin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who made together with him the betrayal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But hitherward stretch out thy hand forthwith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Open mine eyes;”⁠—and open them I did not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to be rude to him was courtesy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, Genoese! ye men at variance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With every virtue, full of every vice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore are ye not scattered from the world?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For with the vilest spirit of Romagna</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I found of you one such, who for his deeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In soul already in Cocytus bathes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still above in body seems alive!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-34" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Fourth Division of the Ninth Circle, the Judecca: Traitors to their Lords and Benefactors⁠—Lucifer, Judas Iscariot, Brutus and Cassius.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“<i>Vexilla Regis prodeunt Inferni</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towards us; therefore look in front of thee,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Master said, “if thou discernest him.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As, when there breathes a heavy fog, or when</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our hemisphere is darkening into night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Appears far off a mill the wind is turning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Methought that such a building then I saw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, for the wind, I drew myself behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Guide, because there was no other shelter.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now was I, and with fear in verse I put it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where the shades were wholly covered up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And glimmered through like unto straws in glass.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some prone are lying, others stand erect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This with the head, and that one with the soles;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another, bow-like, face to feet inverts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When in advance so far we had proceeded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it my Master pleased to show to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The creature who once had the beauteous semblance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He from before me moved and made me stop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying: “Behold Dis, and behold the place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where thou with fortitude must arm thyself.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How frozen I became and powerless then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ask it not, Reader, for I write it not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because all language would be insufficient.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I did not die, and I alive remained not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Think for thyself now, hast thou aught of wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What I became, being of both deprived.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Emperor of the kingdom dolorous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From his mid-breast forth issued from the ice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And better with a giant I compare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than do the giants with those arms of his;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Consider now how great must be that whole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which unto such a part conforms itself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were he as fair once, as he now is foul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lifted up his brow against his Maker,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well may proceed from him all tribulation.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, what a marvel it appeared to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I beheld three faces on his head!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one in front, and that vermilion was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two were the others, that were joined with this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the middle part of either shoulder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they were joined together at the crest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the right-hand one seemed ’twixt white and yellow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The left was such to look upon as those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who come from where the Nile falls valley-ward.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Underneath each came forth two mighty wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as befitting were so great a bird;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sails of the sea I never saw so large.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No feathers had they, but as of a bat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their fashion was; and he was waving them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that three winds proceeded forth therefrom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereby Cocytus wholly was congealed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With six eyes did he weep, and down three chins</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trickled the teardrops and the bloody drivel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At every mouth he with his teeth was crunching</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sinner, in the manner of a brake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that he three of them tormented thus.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him in front the biting was as naught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the clawing, for sometimes the spine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Utterly stripped of all the skin remained.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“That soul up there which has the greatest pain,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Master said, “is Judas Iscariot;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With head inside, he plies his legs without.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the two others, who head downward are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one who hangs from the black jowl is Brutus;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">See how he writhes himself, and speaks no word.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the other, who so stalwart seems, is Cassius.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But night is reascending, and ’tis time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That we depart, for we have seen the whole.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As seemed him good, I clasped him round the neck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he the vantage seized of time and place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when the wings were opened wide apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He laid fast hold upon the shaggy sides;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From fell to fell descended downward then</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Between the thick hair and the frozen crust.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we were come to where the thigh revolves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exactly on the thickness of the haunch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Guide, with labour and with hard-drawn breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turned round his head where he had had his legs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And grappled to the hair, as one who mounts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that to Hell I thought we were returning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Keep fast thy hold, for by such stairs as these,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Master said, panting as one fatigued,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Must we perforce depart from so much evil.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then through the opening of a rock he issued,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And down upon the margin seated me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then tow’rds me he outstretched his wary step.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I lifted up mine eyes and thought to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lucifer in the same way I had left him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I beheld him upward hold his legs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if I then became disquieted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let stolid people think who do not see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What the point is beyond which I had passed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Rise up,” the Master said, “upon thy feet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The way is long, and difficult the road,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now the sun to middle-tierce returns.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was not any palace corridor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where we were, but dungeon natural,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With floor uneven and unease of light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ere from the abyss I tear myself away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Master,” said I when I had arisen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“To draw me from an error speak a little;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where is the ice? and how is this one fixed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus upside down? and how in such short time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From eve to morn has the sun made his transit?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “Thou still imaginest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou art beyond the centre, where I grasped</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hair of the fell worm, who mines the world.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That side thou wast, so long as I descended;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When round I turned me, thou didst pass the point</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which things heavy draw from every side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now beneath the hemisphere art come</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Opposite that which overhangs the vast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dry-land, and ’neath whose cope was put to death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Man who without sin was born and lived.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou hast thy feet upon the little sphere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which makes the other face of the Judecca.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here it is morn when it is evening there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he who with his hair a stairway made us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still fixed remaineth as he was before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon this side he fell down out of heaven;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the land, that whilom here emerged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For fear of him made of the sea a veil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And came to our hemisphere; and peradventure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To flee from him, what on this side appears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Left the place vacant here, and back recoiled.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A place there is below, from Beelzebub</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As far receding as the tomb extends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which not by sight is known, but by the sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a small rivulet, that there descendeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through chasm within the stone, which it has gnawed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With course that winds about and slightly falls.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Guide and I into that hidden road</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now entered, to return to the bright world;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And without care of having any rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We mounted up, he first and I the second,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till I beheld through a round aperture</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some of the beauteous things that Heaven doth bear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thence we came forth to rebehold the stars.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-notes">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Notes</h3>
				<section id="inferno-notes-intro">
					<p>The <i>Divine Comedy</i>.—The <i>Vita Nuova</i> of Dante closes with these words: “After this sonnet there appeared to me a wonderful vision, in which I beheld things that made me propose to say no more of this blessed one, until I shall be able to treat of her more worthily. And to attain thereunto, truly I strive with all my power, as she knoweth. So that if it shall be the pleasure of Him, through whom all things live, that my life continue somewhat longer, I hope to say of her what never yet was said of any woman. And then may it please Him, who is the Sire of courtesy, that my soul may depart to look upon the glory of its Lady, that is to say, of the blessed Beatrice, who in glory gazes into the face of Him, <i>qui est per omnia sacula benedictus</i>.”</p>
					<p>In these lines we have the earliest glimpse of the <i>Divine Comedy</i>, as it rose in the author's mind.</p>
					<p>Whoever has read the <i>Vita Nuova</i> will remember the stress which Dante lays upon the mystic numbers Nine and Three; his first meeting with Beatrice at the beginning of her ninth year, and the end of his; his nine days’ illness, and the thought of her death which came to him on the ninth dav; her death on the ninth day of the ninth month, “computing by the Syrian method,” and in that year of our Lord “when the perfect number ten was nine times completed in that century” which was the thirteenth. Moreover, he says the number nine was friendly to her, because the nine heavens were in conjunction at her birth; and that she was herself the number nine, “that is, a miracle whose root is the wonderful Trinity.”</p>
					<p>Following out this idea, we find the <i>Divine Comedy</i> written in <i>terza rima</i>, or threefold rhyme, divided into three parts, and each part again subdivided in its structure into three. The whole number of cantos is one hundred, the perfect number ten multiplied into itself; but if we count the first canto of the Inferno as a Prelude, which it really is, each part will consist of thirtythree cantos, making ninety-nine in all; and so the favorite mystic numbers reappear.</p>
					<p>The three divisions of the Inferno are minutely described and explained by Dante in Canto XI. They are separated from each other by great spaces in the infernal abyss. The sins punished in them are— <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> Incontinence. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> Malice. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> Bestiality.</p>
					<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <b>Incontinence</b>: 1. The Wanton. 2. The Gluttonous. 3. The Avaricious and Prodigal. 4. The Irascible and the Sullen.</p>
					<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <b>Malice</b>: 1. The Violent against their neighbor, in person or property. 2. The Violent against themselves, in person or property. 3. The Violent against God, or against Nature, the daughter of God, or against Art, the daughter of Nature.</p>
					<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <b>Bestiality</b>: first subdivision: 1. Seducers. 2. Flatterers. 3. Simoniacs. 4. Soothsayers. 5. Barrators. 6. Hypocrites. 7. Thieves. 8. Evil counsellors. 9. Schismatics. 10. Falsifiers.</p>
					<p>Second subdivision: 1. Traitors to their kindred. 2. Traitors to their country. 3. Traitors to their friends. 4. Traitors to their lords and benefactors.</p>
					<p>The <i>Divine Comedy</i> is not strictly an allegorical poem in the sense in which the <i>Faerie Queene</i> is; and yet it is full of allegorical symbols and figurative meanings. In a letter to Can Grande della Scala, Dante writes: “It is to be remarked, that the sense of this work is not simple, but on the contrary one may say manifold. For one sense is that which is derived from the letter, and another is that which is derived from the things signified by the letter. The first is called literal, the second allegorical or moral… The subject, then, of the whole work, taken literally, is the condition of souls after death, simply considered. For on this and around this the whole action of the work turns. But if the work be taken allegorically, the subject is man, how by actions of merit or demerit, through freedom of the will, he justly deserves reward or punishment.”</p>
					<p>It may not be amiss here to refer to what are sometimes called the sources of the <i>Divine Comedy</i>. Foremost among them must be placed the Eleventh Book of the <i>Odyssey</i>, and the Sixth of the <i>Aeneid</i>; and to the latter Dante seems to point significantly in choosing Virgil for his Guide, his Master, his Author, from whom he took “the beautiful style that did him honor.”</p>
					<p>Next to these may be mentioned Cicero's <i>Vision of Scipio</i>, of which Chaucer says:—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>“Chapiters seven it had, of Heven, and Hell,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And Earthe,and soules that therein do dwell.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Then follow the popular legends which were current in Dante's age; an age when the end of all things was thought to be near at hand, and the wonders of the invisible world had laid fast hold on the imaginations of men. Prominent among these is the “Vision of Frate Alberico,” who calls himself “the humblest servant of the servants of the Lord;” and who</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>“Saw in dreame at point-devyse</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Heaven, Earthe, Hell, and Paradyse.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>This vision was written in Latin in the latter half of the twelfth century, and contains a description of Hell, Purgatory, and Paradise, with its Seven Heavens. It is for the most part a tedious tale, and bears evident marks of having been written by a friar of some monastery, when the afternoon sun was shining into his sleepy eyes. He seems, however, to have looked upon his own work with a not unfavorable opinion; for he concludes the Epistle Introductory with the words of St. John: “If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book; and if any man shall take away from these things, God shall take away his part from the good things written in this book.”</p>
					<p>It is not impossible that Dante may have taken a few hints also from the <i>Tesoretto</i> of his teacher, Ser Brunetto Latini, See Canto XIV. Note 30.</p>
					<p>See upon this subject, Cancellieri, <i>Osservazioni Sopra l’Originalifa di Dante</i>;—Wright, <i>St. Patrick's Purgatory, an Essay on the Legends of Purgatory, Hell, and Paradise, current during the Middle Ages</i>;—Ozanam, <i>Dante et la Philosophie Catholique au Treizième Siècle</i>;—Labitte, <i>La Divine Comedie avant Dante</i>, published as an Introduction to the translation of Brizeux;—and Delepierre, <i>Le Livre des Visions, ou l’Enfer et le del decrits par ceux qui les ont vus</i>.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-1">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. The action of the poem begins on Good Friday of the year 1300, at which time Dante, who was born in 1265, had reached the middle of the Scriptural threescore years and ten. It ends on the first Sunday after Easter, making in all ten days.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>2. The dark forest of human life, with its passions, vices, and perplexities of all kinds; politically the state of Florence with its factions Guelf and Ghibelline. Dante, <i>Convito</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> 25, says: “Thus the adolescent, who enters into the erroneous forest of this life, would not know how to keep the right way if he were not guided by his elders.” Brunetto Latini, <i>Tesoretto</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> 75:—</p>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
								<p>
									<span>“Pensando a capo chino</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Perdei il gran cammino,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>E tenni alia traversa</span>
									<br/>
									<span>D’ una selva diversa.”</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>Spenser, <i>Faerie Queene</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 45:—</p>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
								<p>
									<span>“Seeking adventures in the salvage wood.”</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>13. Bunvan, in his <i>Pilgrim's Progress</i>, which is a kind of <i>Divine Comedy</i> in prose, says: “I beheld then that they all went on till they came to the foot of the hill Difficulty But the narrow way lay right up the hill, and the name of the going up the side of the hill is called Difficulty… They went then till they came to the Delectable Mountains, which mountains belong to the Lord of that hill of which we have spoken before.”</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>14. Bunyan, <i>Pilgrim’s Progress</i>:—“But now in this valley of Humiliation poor Christian was hard put to it; for he had gone but a little way before he spied a foul fiend coming over the field to meet him; his name is Apollyon. Then did Christian begin to be afraid, and to cast in his mind whether to go back or stand his ground… Now at the end of this valley was another, called the valley of the Shadow of Death; and Christian must needs go through it, because the way to the Celestial City lay through the midst of it."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>17. The sun, with all its symbolical meanings. This is the morning of Good Friday.</p>
							<p>In the Ptolemaic system the sun was one of the planets.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>20. The deep mountain tarn of his heart, dark with its own depth, and the shadows hanging over it.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>27. Jeremiah ii. 6: “That led us through the wilderness, through a land of deserts and of pits, through a land of drought, and of the shadow of death, through a land that no man passed through, and where no man dwelt.”</p>
							<p>In his note upon this passage Mr. Wright quotes Spenser’s lines. <i>Faerie Queene</i>, I. v. 31—</p>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
								<p>
									<span>“there creature never passed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That back returned without heavenly grace.”</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>30. Climbing the hillside slowly, so that he rests longest on the foot that is lowest.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>31. Jeremiah v. 6: “Wherefore a lion out of the forest shall slay them, a wolf of the evenings shall spoil them, a leopard shall watch over their cities: every one that goeth out thence shall be torn in pieces.”</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>32. Worldly Pleasure; and politically Florence, with its factions of Bianchi and Neri.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>36. <i>Più volte volto.</i> Dante delights in a play upon words as much as Shakespeare.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>38. The stars of Aries. Some philosophers and fathers think the world was created in Spring.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>45. Ambition; and politically the royal house of France.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>48. Some editions read <i>temesse</i>, others <i>tremesse</i>.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>49. Avarice; and politically the Court of Rome, or temporal power of the Popes.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>60. Dante as a Ghibelline and Imperialist is in opposition to the Guelfs, Pope Boniface VIII, and the King of France, Philip the Fair, and is banished from Florence, out of the sunshine, and into “the dry wind that blows from dolorous poverty.” Cato speaks of the “silent moon” in <i>De Re Rustica</i>, XXIX, <i>Evehito luna silenti</i>; and XL, <i>Vites inseri luna silenti</i>. Also Pliny, XVI 39, has <i>Silens luna</i>; and Milton, in <i>Samson Agonistes</i> “Silent as the moon.”</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>63. The long neglect of classic studies in Italy before Dante’s time.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>70. Born under Julius Caesar, but too late to grow up to manhood during his Imperial reign. He flourished later under Augustus.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>79. In this passage Dante but expresses the universal veneration felt for Virgil during the Middle Ages, and especially in Italy. Petrarch’s copy of Virgil is still preserved in the Ambrosian Library at Milan; and at the beginning of it he has recorded in a Latin note the time of his first meeting with Laura, and the date oi her death, which, he says, "I write in this book, rather than elsewhere, because it comes often under my eye."</p>
							<p>In the popular imagination Virgil became a mythical personage and a mighty magician. See the story of <i>Virgilius</i> in Thom’s <i>Early Prose Romances</i>, 11. Dante selects him for his guide, as symbolizing human science or Philosophy. "I say and affirm," he remarks, <i>Convito</i>, V. 16, "that the lady with whom I became enamored after my first love was the most beautiful and modest daughter of the Emperor of the Universe, to whom Pythagoras gave the name of Philosophy."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>87. Dante seems to have been already conscious of the fame which his <i>Vita Nuova</i> and <i>Canzoni</i> had given him.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>101. The greyhound is Can Grande della Scala, Lord of Verona, Imperial Vicar, Ghibelline, and friend of Dante. Verona is between Feltro in the Marca Trivigiana, and Montefeltro in Romagna. Boccaccio, <i>Decameron</i>, I. 7, speaks of him as "one of the most notable and magnificent lords that had been known in Italy, since the Emperor Frederick the Second." To him Dante dedicated the <i>Paradiso</i>. Some commentators think the <i>Veltro</i> is not Can Grande, but Ugguccione della Faggiola. See Troya, <i>Del Veltro Allegorico di Dante</i>.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>106. The plains of Italy, in contradistinction to the mountains; the <i>humilemque Italiam</i> of Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i>, III. 522: "And now the stars being chased away, blushing Aurora appeared, when far off we espy the hills obscure, and lowly Italy."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>116. I give preference to the reading, <i>Di quegli antichi spiriti dolenti</i>.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>122. Beatrice.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-2">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. The evening of Good Friday. Dante, Convito, III. 2, says: "Man is called by philosophers the divine animal." Chaucer's <i>Assemble of Foulcs</i>:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"The daie gan failen, and the darke night</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That reveth bestes from hir businesse</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Berafte me my boke for lacke of light."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>Mr. Ruskin, <i>Modern Painters</i>, III. 240, speaking of Dante's use of theword "bruno," says:—</p>
							<p>"In describing a simple twilight—not a Hades twilight, but an ordinarily fair evening—(Inf. ii. 1), he says, the 'brown' air took the animals away from their fatigues;—the waves under Charon's boat are 'brown' (Inf. iii. 117); and Lethe, which is perfectly clear and yet dark, as with oblivion, is 'bruna-bruna,' 'brown' <em>exceeding</em> brown.' Now, clearly in all these cases no <em>warmth</em> is meant to be mingled in the color. Dante had never seen one of our bog-streams, with its porter-colored foam; and there can be no doubt that, in calling Lethe brown, he means that it was dark slate-gray, inclining to black; as, for instance, our clear Cumberland lakes, which, looked straight down upon where they are deep, seem to be lakes of ink. I am sure this is the color he means; because no clear stream or lake on the Continent ever looks brown, but blue or green; and Dante, by merely taking away the pleasant color, would get at once to this idea of grave clear gray. So, when he was talking of twilight, his eye for color was far too good to let him call it <em>brown</em> in our sense. Twilight is not brown, but purple, golden, or dark gray; and this last was what Dante meant. Farther, I find that this negation of color is always the means by which Dante subdues his tones. Thus the fatal inscription on the Hades gate is written in 'obscure color,' and the air which torments the passionate spirits is 'aer nero,' <em>black</em> air (Inf. v. 51), called presently afterwards (line 81) malignant air, just as the gray cliffs are called malignant cliffs."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>13. Aeneas, founder of the Roman Empire. Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i>, B. VI.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>24. "That is," says Boccaccio, <i>Comento</i>, "St. Peter the Apostle, called the greater on account of his papal dignity, and to distinguish him from many other holy men of the same name."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>28. St. Paul. <i>Acts</i>, ix. 15: "He is a chosen vessel unto me." Also, <i>2 Corinthians</i>, xii. 3, 4: "And I knew such a man, whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell; God knoweth; how that he was caught up into Paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>42. Shakespeare, <i>Macbeth</i>, IV. 1:</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"The flighty purpose never is o'ertook,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless the deed go with it."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>52. Suspended in Limbo; neither in pain nor in glory.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>55. Brighter than the star; than "that star which is brightest," comments Boccaccio. Others say the Sun, and refer to Dante's <i>Canzone</i>, beginning:</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"The star of beauty which doth measure time,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The lady seems, who has enamored me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Placed in the heaven of Love."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>56. Shakespeare, <i>King Lear</i>, V. 3:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"Her voice was ever soft,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gentle, and low; an excellent thing in woman."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>67. This passage will recall Minerva transmitting the message of Juno to Achilles, <i>Iliad</i>, II: "Go thou forthwith to the army of the Achaeans, and hesitate not; but restrain each man with thy persuasive words, nor suffer them, to drag to the sea their doubleoared ships."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>70. Beatrice Portinari, Dante's first love, the inspiration of his song and in his mind the symbol of the Divine. He says of her in the <i>Vita Nuova</i>:—"This most gentle lady, of whom there has been discourse in what precedes, reached such favor among the people, that when she passed along the way persons ran to see her, which gave me wonderful delight. And when she was near any one, such modesty took possession of his heart, that he did not dare to raise his eyes or to return her salutation; and to this, should any one doubt it, many, as having experienced it, could bear witness for me. She, crowned and clothed with humility, took her way, displaying no pride in that which she saw and heard. Many, when she had passed, said, 'This is not a woman, rather is she one of the most beautiful angels of heaven.' Others said, 'She is a miracle. Blessed be the Lord who can perform such a marvel.' I say, that she showed herself so gentle and so full of all beauties, that those who looked on her felt within themselves a pure and sweet delight, such as they could not tell in words."—C. E. Norton, <i>The New Life</i>, 51, 52.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>78. The heaven of the moon, which contains or encircles the earth.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>84. The ampler circles of Paradise.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>94. Divine Mercy.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>97. St. Lucia, emblem of enlightening Grace.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>102. Rachel, emblem of Divine Contemplation. See Par. XXXH. 9.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>108. Beside that fiood, where ocean has no vaunt; "That is," says Boccaccio, <i>Comento</i>, "the sea cannot boast of being more impetuous or more dangerous than that."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>127. This simile has been imitated by Chaucer, Spenser, and many more. Jeremy Taylor says:—</p>
							<p>"So have I seen the sun kiss the frozen earth, which was bound up with the images of death, and the colder breath of the north; and then the waters break from their enclosures, and melt with joy, and run in useful channels; and the flies do rise again from their little graves in walls, and dance awhile in the air, to tell that there is joy within, and that the great mother of creatures will open the stock of her new refreshment, become useful to mankind, and sing praises to her Redeemer."</p>
							<p>Rossetti, <i>Spirito Antipapale del Secolo di Dante</i>, translated by Miss Ward, II 216, makes this political application of the lines: "<em>The Florentines</em>, called <em>Sons of Flora</em>, are compared to <em>flowers</em>; and Dante calls the two parties who divided the city <em>white and black flowers</em>, and himself <em>white-flower</em>—the name by which he was called by many. Now he makes use of a very abstruse comparison, to express how he became, from a Guelph or <em>Black</em>, a Ghibelline or <em>White</em>. He describes himself as a flower, first bent and closed by the night frosts, and then <em>blanched</em> or <em>whitened</em> by the sun (the symbol of reason), which opens its leaves; and what produces the effect of the sun on him is a speech of Virgil's, persuading him to follow his guidance."</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-3">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. This canto begins with a repetition of sounds like the tolling of a funeral bell: <i>dolente</i>... <i>dolore</i>!</p>
							<p>Ruskin, <i>Modern Painters</i>, III 215, speaking of the Inferno, says:—</p>
							<p>"Milton's effort, in all that he tells us of his Inferno, is to make it indefinite; Dante's, to make it <em>definite</em>. Both, indeed, describe it as entered through gates; but, within the gate, all is wild and fenceless with Milton, having indeed its four rivers—the last vestige of the mediaeval tradition,—but rivers which flow through a waste of mountain and moorland, and by 'many a frozen, many a fiery Alp.' But Dante's Inferno is accurately separated into circles drawn with well-pointed compasses; mapped and properly surveyed in every direction, trenched in a thoroughly good style of engineering from depth to depth, and divided, in the 'accurate middle' (<i>dritto mezzo</i>) of its deepest abyss, into a concentric series of ten moats and embankments, like those about a castle, with bridges from each embankment to the next; precisely in the manner of those bridges over Hiddekel and Euphrates, which Mr. Macaulay thinks so innocently designed, apparently not aware that he is also laughing at Dante. These larger fosses are of rock, and the bridges also; but as he goes further into detail, Dante tells us of various minor fosses and embankments, in which he anxiously points out to us not only the formality, but the neatness and perfectness, of the stonework. For instance, in describing the river Phlegethon, he tells us that it was 'paved with stone at the bottom, and at the sides, and <em>over the edges of the sides</em>,' just as the water is at the baths of Bulicame; and for fear we should think this embankment at all larger than it really was, Dante adds, carefully, that it was made just like the embankments of Ghent or Bruges against the sea, or those in Lombardy which bank the Brenta, only 'not so high, nor so wide,' as any of these. And besides the trenches, we have two well-built castles; one like Ecbatana, with seven circuits of wall (and surrounded by a fair stream), wherein the great poets and sages of antiquity live; and another, a great fortified city with walls of iron, red-hot, and a deep fosse round it, and full of 'grave citizens,'—the city of Dis.</p>
							<p>"Now, whether this be in what we moderns call 'good taste,' or not, I do not mean just now to inquire,—Dante having nothing to do with taste, but with the facts of what he had seen; only, so far as the imaginative faculty of the two poets is concerned, note that Milton's vagueness is not the sign of imagination, but of its absence, so far as it is significative in the matter. For it does not follow, because Milton did not map out his Inferno as Dante did, that he <em>could</em> not have done. so if he had chosen; only it was the easier and less imaginative process to leave it vague than to define it. Imagination is always the seeing and asserting faculty; that which obscures or conceals may be judgment, or feeling, but not invention. The invention, whether good or bad, is in the accurate engineering, not in the fog and uncertainty."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>18. Aristotle says: "The good of the intellect is the highest beatitude;" and Dante in the <i>Convito</i>: "The True is the good of the intellect." In other words, the knowledge of God is intellectual good.</p>
							<p>"It is a most just punishment," says St. Augustine, "that man should lose that freedom which man could not use, yet had power to keep, if he would, and that he who had knowledge to do what was right, and did not do it, should be deprived of the knowledge of what was right; and that he who would not do righteously, when he had the power, should lose the power to do it when he had the will."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>22. The description given of the Mouth of Hell by Frate Alberico, <i>Visio</i>, 9, is in the grotesque spirit of the Mediaeval Mysteries.</p>
							<p>"After all these things, I was led to the Tartarean Regions, and to the mouth of the Infernal Pit, which seemed like unto a well; regions full of horrid darkness, of fetid exhalations, of shrieks and loud howlings. Near this Hell there was a Worm of immeasurable size, bound with a huge chain, one end of which seemed to be fastened in Hell. Before the mouth of this Hell there stood a great multitude of souls, which he absorbed at once, as if they were flies; so that, drawing in his breath, he swallowed them all together; then, breathing, exhaled them all on fire, like sparks."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>36. The reader will here be reminded of Bunyan's town of Fair-speech.</p>
							<p>"<em>Christian.</em> Pray who are your kindred there, if a man may be so bold.</p>
							<p>"<em>By-ends.</em> Almost the whole town; and in particular my Lord Turnabout, my Lord Timeserver, my Lord Fair-speech, from whose ancestors that town first took its name; also Mr. Smooth-man, Mr, Facing-both-ways, Mr. Anything,—and the parson of our parish, Mr. Two-tongues, was my mother's own brother by father's side...</p>
							<p>"There Christian stepped a little aside to his fellow Hopeful, saying, 'It runs in my mind that this is one By-ends of Fair-speech; and if it be he, we have as very a knave in our company as dwelleth in all these parts.'"</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>42. Many commentators and translators interpret <i>alcuna</i> in its usual signification of <em>some</em>: "For some glory the damned would have from them." This would be a reason why these pusillanimous ghosts should not be sent into the profounder abyss, but no reason why they should not be received there. This is strengthened by what comes afterwards, 1. 63. These souls were "hateful to God, and to his enemies." They were not good enough for Heaven, nor bad enough for Hell. "So then, because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth." <i>Revelation</i> iii. 16.</p>
							<p>Macchiavelli represents this scorn of inefficient mediocrity in an epigram on Peter Soderini:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"The night that Peter Soderini died</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He at the mouth of Hell himself presented.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>'What, you come into Hell? poor ghost demented,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go to the Babies' Limbo!' Pluto cried."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>The same idea is intensified in the old ballad of <i>Carle of Kelly-Burn Brees</i>, Cromek, p. 37:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"She 's nae fit for heaven, an' she 'll ruin a' hell."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>52. This restless flag is an emblem of the shifting and unstable minds of its followers.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>59. Generally supposed to be Pope Celestine V. whose great refusal, or abdication, of the papal office is thus described by Boccaccio in his <i>Comento</i>:—</p>
							<p>"Being a simple man and of a holy life, living as a hermit in the mountains of Morrone in Abruzzo, above Selmona, he was elected Pope in Perugia after the death of Pope Niccola d' Ascoli; and his name being Peter, he was called Celestine. Considering his simplicity. Cardinal Messer Benedetto Gatano, a very cunning man, of great courage and desirous of being Pope, managing astutely, began to show him that he held this high office much to the prejudice of his own soul, inasmuch as he did not feel himself competent for it;—others pretend that he contrived with some private servants of his to have voices heard in the chamber of the aforesaid Pope, which, as if they were voices of angels sent from heaven, said, 'Resign, Celestine! Resign, Celestine!'—moved by which, and being an idiotic man, he took counsel with Messer Benedetto aforesaid, as to the best method of resigning."</p>
							<p>Celestine having relinquished the papal office, this "Messer Benedetto aforesaid" was elected Pope, under the title of Boniface VIII. His greatest misfortune was that he had Dante for an adversary.</p>
							<p>Gower gives this legend of Pope Celestine in his <i>Confessio Amantis</i>, Book II., as an example of "the vice of supplantacion." He says:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"This clerk, when he hath herd the form.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How he the pope shuld enform,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Toke of the cardinal his leve</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And goth him home, till it was eve.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And prively the trompe he hadde</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Til that the pope was abedde.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And at midnight when he knewe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The pope slepte, than he blewe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within his trompe through the wall</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tolde in what maner he shall</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His papacie leve, and take</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His first estate."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>Milman, <i>Hist. Latin Christianity</i>, VI. 194, speaks thus upon the subject:—</p>
							<p>"The abdication of Celestine V. was an event unprecedented in the annals of the Church, and jarred harshly against some of the first principles of the Papal authority. It was a confession of common humanity, of weakness below the ordinary standard of men in him whom the Conclave, with more than usual certitude, as guided by the special interposition of the Holy Ghost, had raised to the spiritual throne of the world. The Conclave had been, as it seemed, either under an illusion as to this declared manifestation of the Holy Spirit, or had been permitted to deceive itself. Nor was there less incongruity in a Pope, whose office invested him in something at least approaching to infallibility, acknowledging before the world his utter incapacity, his undeniable fallibility. That idea, formed out of many conflicting conceptions, yet forcibly harmonized by long, traditionary reverence, of unerring wisdom, oracular truth, authority which it was sinful to question or limit, was strangely disturbed and confused, not as before by too overweening ambition, or even awful yet still unacknowledged crime, but by avowed weakness, bordering on imbecility. His profound piety hardly reconciled the confusion. A saint after all made but a bad Pope.</p>
							<p>"It was viewed, in his own time, in a different light by different minds. The monkish writers held it up as the most noble example of monastic, of Christian perfection. Admirable as was his election, his abdication was even more to be admired. It was an example of humility stupendous to all, imitable by few. The divine approval was said to be shown by a miracle which followed directly on his resignation; but the scorn of man has been expressed by the undying verse of Dante, who condemned him who was guilty of the baseness of the 'great refusal' to that circle of hell where are those disdained alike by mercy and justice, on whom the poet will not condescend to look. This sentence, so accordant with the stirring and passionate soul of the great Florentine, has been feebly counteracted, if counteracted, by the praise of Petrarch in his declamation on the beauty of a solitary life, for which the lyrist professed a somewhat hollow and poetic admiration. Assuredly there was no magnanimity contemptuous of the Papal greatness in the abdication of Celestine; it was the weariness, the conscious inefficiency, the regret of a man suddenly wrenched away from all his habits, pursuits, and avocations, and unnaturally compelled or tempted to assume an uncongenial dignity. It was the cry of passionate feebleness to be released from an insupportable burden. Compassion is the highest emotion of sympathy which it would have desired or could deserve."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>75. Spenser's "misty dampe of misconceyving night."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>82. Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i>, VI, Davidson's translation:—</p>
							<p>"A grim ferryman guards these floods and rivers, Charon, of frightful slovenliness; on whose chin a load of gray hair neglected lies; his eyes are flame: his vestments hang from his shoulders by a knot, with filth overgrown. Himself thrusts on the barge with a pole, and tends the sails, and wafts over the bodies in his iron-colored boat, now in years: but the god is of fresh and green old age. Hither the whole tribe in swarms come pouring to the banks, matrons and men, the souls of magnanimous heroes who had gone through life, boys and unmarried maids, and young men who had been stretched on the funeral pile before the eyes of their parents; as numerous as withered leaves fall in the woods with the first cold of autumn, or as numerous as birds flock to the land from deep ocean, when the chilling year drives them beyond sea, and sends them to sunny climes. They stood praying to cross the flood the first, and were stretching forth their hands with fond desire to gain the further bank: but the sullen boatman admits sometimes these, sometimes those; while others to a great distance removed, he debars from the banks."</p>
							<p>And Shakespeare, <i>Richard</i> III., I. 4:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"I passed, methought, the melancholy flood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With that grim ferryman which poets write of,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unto the kingdom of perpetual night."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>87. Shakespeare, <i>Measure for Measure</i>, III. I:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"This sensible warm motion to become</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To bathe in fiery floods, or to reside</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In thrilling regions of thick-ribbed ice;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be imprisoned in the viewless winds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And blown with restless violence round about</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The pendent world; or to be worse than worst</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of those that lawless and incertain thoughts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Imagine howling."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>89. Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i>, VI.: "This is the region of Ghosts, of Sleep and drowsy Night; to waft over the bodies of the living in my Stygian boat is not permitted."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>93. The souls that were to be saved assembled at the mouth of the Tiber, where they were received by the celestial pilot, or ferryman, who transported them to the shores of Purgatory, as described in <i>Purg</i>. II.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>94. Many critics, and foremost among them Padre Pompeo Venturi, blame Dante for mingling together things Pagan and Christian. But they should remember how through all the Middle Ages human thought was wrestling with the old traditions; how many Pagan observances passed into Christianity in those early days; what reverence Dante had for Virgil and the classics; and how many Christian nations still preserve some traces of Paganism in the names of the stars, the months, and the days. Padre Pompeo should not have forgotten that he, though a Christian, bore a Pagan name, which perhaps is as evident a <i>brutto miscuglio</i> in a learned Jesuit, as any which he has pointed out in Dante.</p>
							<p>Upon him and other commentators of the Divine Poem, a very amusing chapter might be written. While the great Comedy is going on upon the scene above, with all its pomp and music, these critics in the pit keep up such a perpetual wrangling among themselves, as seriously to disturb the performance. Biagioli is the most violent of all, particularly against Venturi, whom he calls an "infamous dirty dog," <i>sozzo can vituperato</i>, an epithet hardly permissible in the most heated literary controversy. Whereupon in return Zani de' Ferranti calls Biagioli "an inurbane grammarian," and a "most ungrateful ingrate,"—<i>quel grammatico inurbano</i>... <i>ingrato ingratissimo</i>.</p>
							<p>Any one who is desirous of tracing out the presence of Paganism in Christianity will find the subject amply discussed by Middleton in his Letter from Rome.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>109. Dryden's <i>Aeneis</i>, B. VI.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"His eyes lilce hollow furnaces on fire."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>112. Homer, <i>Iliad</i>, VI.: "As is the race of leaves, such is that of men; some leaves the wind scatters upon the ground, and others the budding wood produces, for they come again in the season of Spring. So is the race of men, one springs up and the other dies."</p>
							<p>See also Note 82 of this canto.</p>
							<p>Mr. Ruskin, <i>Modern Painters</i>, III. 160, says:—</p>
							<p>"When Dante describes the spirits falling from the bank of Acheron 'as dead leaves flutter from a bough,' he gives the most perfect image possible of their utter lightness, feebleness, passiveness, and scattering agony of despair, without, however, for an instant losing his own clear perception that these are souls, and those are leaves: he makes no confusion of one with the other."</p>
							<p>Shelley in his Ode to the West Wind inverts this image, and compares the dead leaves to ghosts:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"O wild West Wind! thou breath of Autumn's being!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou from whose presence the leaves dead</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are driven like ghosts, from an enchanter fleeing,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yellow, and black, and pale, and hectic red,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pestilence-stricken multitudes."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-4">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. Dante is borne across the river Acheron in his sleep, he does not tell us how, and awakes on the brink of "the dolorous valley of the abyss." He now enters the First Circle of the Inferno; the Limbo of the Unbaptized, the border land, as the name denotes.</p>
							<p>Frate Alberico in § 2 of his Vision says, that the divine punishments are tempered to extreme youth and old age.</p>
							<p>"Man is first a little child, then grows and reaches adolescence, and attains to youthful vigor; and, little by little growing weaker, declines into old age; and at every step of life the sum of his sins increases. So likewise the little children are punished least, and more and more the adolescents and the youths; until, their sins decreasing with the long-continued torments, punishment also begins to decrease, as it by a kind of old age (<i>veluti quadam senectute</i>)."</p>
							<p>10. Frate Alberico, in § 9: "The darkness was so dense and impenetrable that it was impossible to see anything there."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>28. Mental, not physical pain; what the French theologians call <i>la peine du dam</i>, the privation of the sight of God.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>30. Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i>, VI: "Forthwith are heard voices, loud wailings, and weeping ghosts of infants, in the first opening of the gate; whom, bereaved of sweet life out of the course of nature, and snatched from the breast, a black day cut off, and buried in an untimely grave."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>53. The descent of Christ into Limbo. Neither here nor elsewhere in the Inferno does Dante mention the name of Christ.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>72. The reader will not fail to observe how Dante makes the word <em>honor</em>, in its various forms, ring and reverberate through these lines,—<i>orrevol, onori, orranza, onrata, onorata!</i></p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>86. Dante puts the sword into the hand of Homer as a symbol of his warlike epic, which is a Song of the Sword.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>93. Upon this line Boccaccio, <i>Comento</i>, says: "A proper thing it is to honor every man, but especially those who are of one and the same profession, as these were with Virgil."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>100. Another assertion of Dante's consciousness of his own power as a poet.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>106. This is the Noble Castle of human wit and learning, encircled with its seven scholastic walls, the <i>Trivium</i>, Logic, Grammar, Rhetoric, and the <i>Quadrivium</i>. Arithmetic, Astronomy, Geometry, Music.</p>
							<p>The fair rivulet is Eloquence, which Dante does not seem to consider a very profound matter, as he and Virgil pass over it as if it were dry ground.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>118. Of this word "enamel" Mr. Ruskin, <i>Modern Painters</i>, III. 227, remarks:—</p>
							<p>"The first instance I know of its right use, though very probably it had been so employed before, is in Dante. The righteous spirits of the pre-Christian ages are seen by him, though in the Inferno, yet in a place open, luminous and high, walking upon the 'green enamel.'</p>
							<p>"I am very sure that Dante did not use this phrase as we use it. He knew well what enamel was; and his readers, in order to understand him thoroughly, must remember what it is,—a vitreous paste, dissolved in water, mixed with metallic oxides, to give it the opacity and the color required, spread in a moist state on metal, and afterwards hardened by fire, so as never to change. And Dante means, in using this metaphor of the grass of the Inferno, to mark that it is laid as a tempering and cooling substance over the dark, metallic, gloomy ground; but yet so hardened by the fire, that it is not any more fresh or living grass, but a smooth, silent, lifeless bed of eternal green. And we know how <em>hard</em> Dante's idea of it was; because afterwards, in what is perhaps the most awful passage of the whole Inferno, when the three furies rise at the top of the burning tower, and, catching sight of Dante, and not being able to get at him, shriek wildly for the Gorgon to come up, too, that they may turn him into stone, the word <em>stone</em> is not hard enough for them. Stone might crumble away after it was made, or something with life might grow upon it; no, it shall not be stone; they will make enamel of him; nothing can grow out of that; it is dead forever."</p>
							<p>And yet just before, line 111, Dante speaks of this meadow as a "meadow of fresh verdure."</p>
							<p>Compare Brunetto's Tesoretto, XIII.</p>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
								<p>
									<span>"Or va mastro Brunetto</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Per lo cammino stretto,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cercando di vedere,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">E toccare, e sapere</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cib, che gli e destinato.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">E non fui guari andato,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ch' i' fui nella diserta,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Dov' i' non trovai certa</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ne strada, ne sentiero.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Deh che paese fero</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Trovai in quelle parti!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Che s' io sapessi d' arti</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Quivi mi bisognava,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Che quanto piii mirava,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pill mi parea selvaggio.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Quivi non ha viaggio,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Quivi non ha persona,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Quivi non ha magione,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Non bestia, non uccello,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Non fiume, non ruscello,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Non formica, ne mosca,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Ne cosa, ch' i' conosca.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>E io pensando forte,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Dottai ben della morte.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>E non e maraviglia;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Che ben trecento miglia</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Girava d' ogni lato</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Quel paese snagiato.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ma si m' assicurai</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Quando mi ricordai</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Del sicuro segnale,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Che contra tutto male</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mi da securamento:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">E io presi ardimento,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Quasi per avventura</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Per una valle scura,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tanto, ch' al terzo giorno</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">I' mi trovai d' intorno</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Un grande pian giocondo,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Lo pill gaio del mondo,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>E lo pill dilettoso.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Ma ricontar non oso</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cib, ch' io trovai, e vidi,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Se Dio mi guardi, c guidi.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Io non sarei creduto</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Di cib, ch' i' ho veduto;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ch' i' vidi Imperadori,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">E Re, e gran signori,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>E mastri di scienzc,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Che dittavan sentenze;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>E vidi tante cose,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Che gia 'n rime, ne 'n prose</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Non le poria ritrare."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>128. In the <i>Convito</i>, IV. 28, Dante makes Marcia, Cato's wife, a symbol of the noble soul: "<i>Per la quale Marzia s' intende la nobile anima.</i>"</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>129. The Saladin of the Crusades. See Gibbon, Chap. LIX. Dante also makes mention of him, as worthy of affectionate remembrance, in the <i>Convito</i>, IV. 2. Mr. Cary quotes the following passage from Knolles's <i>History of the Turks</i>, page 57:—</p>
							<p>"About this time (1193) died the great Sultan Saladin, the greatest terror of the Christians, who, mindful of man's fragility and the vanity of worldly honors, commanded at the time of his death no solemnity to be used at his burial, but only his shirt, in manner of an ensign, made fast unto the point of a lance, to be carried before his dead body as an ensign, a plain priest going before, and crying aloud unto the peopie in this sort, 'Saladin, Conqueror of the East, of all the greatness and riches he had in his life, carrieth not with him anything more than his shirt.' A sight worthy so great a king, as wanted nothing to his eternal commendation more than the true knowledge of his salvation in Christ Jesus. He reigned about sixteen years with great honor."</p>
							<p>The following story of Saladin is from the <i>Cento Novelle Antiche</i>. Roscoe's <i>Italian Novelists</i>, I. 18:—</p>
							<p>"On another occasion the great Saladin, in the career of victory, proclaimed a truce between the Christian armies and his own. During this interval he visited the camp and the cities belonging to his enemies, with the design, should he approve of the customs and manners of the people, of embracing the Christian faith. He observed their tables spread with the finest damask coverings ready prepared for the feast, and he praised their magnificence. On entering the tents of the king of France during a festival, he was much pleased with the order and ceremony with which everything was conducted, and the courteous manner in which he feasted his nobles; but when he approached the residence of the poorer class, and perceived them devouring their miserable pittance upon the ground, he blamed the want of gratitude which permitted so many faithful followers of their chief to fare so much worse than the rest of their Christian brethren.</p>
							<p>"Afterwards, several of the Christian leaders returned with the Sultan to observe the manners of the Saracens. They appeared much shocked on seeing all ranks of people take their meals sitting upon the ground. The Sultan led them into a grand pavilion where he feasted his court, surrounded with the most beautiful tapestries, and rich foot-cloths, on which were wrought large embroidered figures of the cross. The Christian chiefs trampled them under their feet with the utmost indifference, and even rubbed their boots, and spat upon them.</p>
							<p>"On perceiving this, the Sultan turned towards them in the greatest anger, exclaiming: 'And do you who pretend to preach the cross treat it thus ignominiously? Gentlemen, I am shocked at your conduct. Am I to suppose from this that the worship of your Deity consists only in words, not in actions? Neither your manners nor your conduct please me.' And on this he dismissed them, breaking off the truce and commencing hostilities more warmly than before."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>143. Avicenna, an Arabian physician of Ispahan in the eleventh century. Born 980, died 1036.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>144. Averrhoës, an Arabian scholar of the twelfth century, who translated the works of Aristotle, and wrote a commentary upon them. He was born in Cordova in 1149, and died in Morocco, about 1200. He was the head of the Western School of philosophy, as Avicenna was of the Eastern.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-5">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>In the Second Circle are found the souls of carnal sinners, whose punishment is</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"To be imprisoned in the viewless winds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And blown with restless violence round about</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The pendent world."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>2. The circles grow smaller and smaller as they descend.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>4. Minos, the king of Crete, so renowned for justice as to be called the Favorite of the Gods, and after death made Supreme Judge in the Infernal Regions. Dante furnishes him with a tail, thus converting him, after the mediaeval fashion, into a Christian demon.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>21. Thou, too, as well as Charon, to whom Virgil has already made the same reply. Canto VI. 22.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>28. In Canto I. 60, the sun is silent; here the light is dumb.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>51. Gower, Confessio Amantis, VIII, gives a similar list "of gentil folke that whilom were lovers," seen by him as he lay in a swound and listened to the music</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"Of bombarde and of clarionne</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With cornemuse and shalmele."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>61. Queen Dido.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>65. Achilles, being in love with Polyxena, a daughter of Priam, went unarmed to the temple of Apollo, where he was put to death by Paris.</p>
							<p>Gower, <i>Confessio Amantis</i>, IV., says:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"For I have herde tell also</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Achilles left his armes so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Both of himself and of his men,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At Troie for Polixenen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon her love when he felle,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That for no chaunce that befelle</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Among the Grekes or up or down</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He wolde nought ayen the town</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ben armed for the love of her."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>"I know not how," says Bacon in his Essay on Love, "but martial men are given to love; I think it is but as they are given to wine; for perils commonly ask to be paid in pleasure."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>67. Paris of Troy, of whom Spenser says, <i>Faerie Queene</i>, III, ix. 34:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"Most famous Worthy of the world, by whome</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That warre was kindled which did Troy inflame</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And stately towres of Ilion whilome</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Brought unto baleflill ruine, was by name</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sir Paris, far renown'd through noble fame."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>Tristan is the Sir Tristram of the Romances of Chivalry. See his adventures in the <i>Mort d' Arthure</i>. Also Thomas of Ercildoune's <i>Sir Tristram, a Metrical Romance</i>. His amours with Yseult or Ysonde bring him to this circle of the Inferno.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>71. Shakespeare, Sonnet CVI.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"When in the chronicle of wasted time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I see descriptions of the fairest wights</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And beauty making beautiful old rhyme</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>See also the "wives and daughters of chieftains" that appear to Ulysses, in the <i>Odyssey</i>, Book XI.</p>
							<p>Also Milton, Paradise Regained, II. 357:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"And ladies of the Hesperides, that seemed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fairer than feigned of old, or fabled since</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of fairy damsels met in forest wide</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By knights of Logres, or of Lyones,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lancelot, or Palleas, or Pellenore."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>89. In the original, <i>l'aer perso</i>, the perse air. Dante, <i>Convito</i>, IV. 20, defines perse as "a color mixed of purple and black, but the black predominates." Chaucer's "Doctour of Phisike" in the <i>Canterbury Tales</i>, Prologue 441, wore this color:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"In sanguin and in perse he clad was alle,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lined with taffata and with sendalle."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>The Glossary defines it, "skie colored, of a bluish gray." The word is again used, VII. 103, and <i>Purg</i>. IX. 97.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>97. The city of Ravenna. "One reaches Ravenna," says Ampère, <i>Voyage Dantesque</i>, p. 311, "by journeying along the borders of a pine forest, which is seven leagues in length, and which seemed to me an immense funereal wood, serving as an avenue to the common tomb of those two great powers, Dante and the Roman Empire in the West. There is hardly room for any other memories than theirs. But other poetic names are attached to the Pine Woods of Ravenna. Not long ago Lord Byron evoked there the fantastic tales borrowed by Dryden from Boccaccio, and now he is himself a figure of the past, wandering in this melancholy place. I thought, in traversing it, that the singer of despair had ridden along this melancholy shore, trodden before him by the graver and slower footstep of the poet of the Inferno."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>99. Quoting this line, Ampère remarks, <i>Voyage Dantesque</i>, p. 312: "We have only to cast our eyes upon the map to recognize the topographical exactitude of this last expression. In fact, in all the upper part of its course, the Po receives a multitude of affluents, which converge towards its bed. They are the Tessino, the Adda, the Olio, the Mincio, the Trebbia, the Bormida, the Taro;—names which recur so often in the history of the wars of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>103. Here the word <em>love</em> is repeated, as the word <em>honor</em> was in Canto IV. 72. The verse murmurs with it, like the "moan of doves in immemorial elms."</p>
							<p>St. Augustine says in his Confessions, III. 1: "I loved not yet, yet I loved to love... I sought what I might love, in love with loving."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>104. I think it is Coleridge who says: "The desire of man is for the woman, but the desire of woman is for the desire of man."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>107. Caïna is in the lowest circle of the Inferno, where fratricides are punished.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>116. Francesca, daughter of Guido da Polenta, Lord of Ravenna, and wife of Gianciotto Malatesta, son of the Lord of Rimini. The lover, Paul Malatesta, was the brother of the husband, who, discovering their amour, put them both to death with his own hand.</p>
							<p>Carlyle, <i>Heroes and Hero Worship</i>, Lect. III., says:—</p>
							<p>"Dante's painting is not graphic only, brief, true, and of a vividness as of fire in dark night; taken on the wider scale, it is every way noble, and the outcome of a great soul. Francesca and her Lover, what qualities in that! A thing woven as out of rainbows, on a ground of eternal black. A small flute-voice of infinite wail speaks there, into our very heart of hearts. A touch of womanhood in it too: <i>della bella persona, che mi fu tolta</i>; and how, even in the Pit of woe, it is a solace that he will never part from her! Saddest tragedy in these <i>alti guai</i>. And the racking winds, in that <i>aer bruno</i>, whirl them away again, to wail forever!—Strange to think: Dante was the friend of this poor Francesca's father; Francesca herself may have sat upon the Poet's knee, as a bright, innocent little child. Infinite pity, yet also infinite rigor of law: it is so Nature is made; it is so Dante discerned that she was made."</p>
							<p>Later commentators assert that Dante's friend Guido was not the father of Francesca, but her nephew.</p>
							<p>Boccaccio's account, translated from his Commentary by Leigh Hunt, <i>Stories from the Italian Poets</i>, Appendix II, is as follows:—</p>
							<p>"You must know that this lady. Madonna Francesca, was daughter of Messer Guido the Elder, lord of Ravenna and of Cervia, and that a long and grievous war having been waged between him and the lords Malatesta of Rimini, a treaty of peace by certain mediators was at length concluded between them; the which, to the end that it might be the more firmly established, it pleased both parties to desire to fortify by relationship; and the matter of this relationship was so discoursed, that the said Messer Guido agreed to give his young and fair daughter in marriage to Gianciotto, the son of Messer Malatesta. Now, this being made known to certain of the friends of Messer Guido, one of them said to him: 'Take care what you do; for if you contrive not matters discreetly, such relationship will beget scandal. You know what manner of person your daughter is, and of how lofty a spirit; and if she see Gianciotto before the bond is tied, neither you nor any one else will have power to persuade her to marry him; therefore, if it so please you, it seems to me that it would be good to conduct the matter thus: namely, that Gianciotto should not come hither himself to marry her, but that a brother of his should come and espouse her in his name.'</p>
							<p>"Gianciotto was a man of great spirit, and hoped, after his father's death, to become lord of Rimini; in the contemplation of which event, albeit he was rude in appearance and a cripple, Messer Guido desired him for a son-in-law above any one of his brothers. Discerning, therefore, the reasonableness of what his friend counselled, he secretly disposed matters according to his device; and a day being appointed. Polo, a brother of Gianciotto, came to Ravenna with full authority to espouse Madonna Francesca. Polo was a handsome man, very pleasant, and of a courteous breeding; and passing with other gentlemen over the court-yard of the palace of Messer Guido, a damsel who knew him pointed him out to Madonna Francesca through an opening in the casement, saying, 'That is he that is to be your husband;' and so indeed the poor lady believed, and incontinently placed in him her whole affection; and the ceremony of the marriage having been thus brought about, and the lady conveyed to Rimini, she became not aware of the deceit till the morning ensuing the marriage, when she beheld Gianciotto rise from her side; the which discovery moved her to such disdain, that she became not a whit the less rooted in her love for Polo. Nevertheless, that it grew to be unlawful I never heard, except in what is written by this author (Dante), and possibly it might so have become; albeit I take what he says to have been an invention framed on the possibility, rather than anything which he knew of his own knowledge. Be this as it may. Polo and Madonna Francesca living in the same house, and Gianciotto being gone into a certain neighboring district as governor, they fell into great companionship with one another, suspecting nothing; but a servant of Gianciotto's, noting it, went to his master and told him how matters looked; with the which Gianciotto being fiercely moved, secretly returned to Rimini; and seeing Polo enter the room of Madonna Francesca the while he himself was arriving, went straight to the door, and finding it locked inside, called to his lady to come out; for, Madonna Francesca and Polo having descried him. Polo thought to escape suddenly through an opening in the wall, by means of which there was a descent into another room; and therefore, thinking to conceal his fault either wholly or in part, he threw himself into the opening, telling the lady to go and open the door. But his hope did not turn out as he expected; for the hem of a mantle which he had on caught upon a nail, and the lady opening the door meantime, in the belief that all would be well by reason of Polo's not being there, Gianciotto caught sight of Polo as he was detained by the hem of the mantle, and straightway ran with his dagger in his hand to kill him; whereupon the lady, to prevent it, ran between them; but Gianciotto having lifted the dagger, and put the whole force of his arm into the blow, there came to pass what he had not desired,—namely, that he struck the dagger into the bosom of the lady before it could reach Polo; by which accident, being as one who had loved the lady better than himself, he withdrew the dagger and again struck at Polo, and slew him; and so leaving them both dead, he hastily went his way and betook him to his wonted affairs; and the next morning the two lovers, with many tears, were buried together in the same grave."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>121. This thought is from Boethius, <i>De Consolat. Philos.</i>, Lib. II. Prosa 4: "<i>In omni adversitate for tun a, infelicissimum genus est infortunii fuisse felicem et non esse.</i>"</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>In the <i>Convito</i>, II. 16, Dante speaks of Boethius and Tully as having directed him "to the love, that is to the study, of this most gentle lady Philosophy." From this Venturi and Biagioli infer that, by the Teacher, Boethius is meant, not Virgil.</p>
							<p>This interpretation, however, can hardly be accepted, as not in one place only, but throughout the Inferno and the Purgatorio, Dante proclaims Virgil as his Teacher, <i>il mio Dottore</i>. Lombardi thinks that Virgil had experience of this "greatest sorrow," finding himself also in "the infernal prison;" and that it is to this, in contrast with his happy life on earth, that Francesca alludes, and not to anything in his writings.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>The Romance of Launcelot of the Lake. See Delvan, <i>Biblioteque Bleue</i>:—</p>
							<p>"Chap. 39. <i>Comment Launcelot et la Reine Genievre deviserent de choses et d'autres, et surtout de choses amoureuses...</i></p>
							<p>"<i>La Reine, voyant qu'il n'osait plus rien faire ni dire, le prit par le menton et le baisa assez longuement en presence de Gallehault.</i>"</p>
							<p>The Romance was to these two lovers, what Galeotto (Gallehault or Sir Galahad) had been to Launcelot and Queen Guenever.</p>
							<p>Leigh Hunt speaks of the episode of Francesca as standing in the Inferno "like a lily in the mouth of Tartarus."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>142. Chaucer, <i>Knightes Tale</i>:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"The colde death, with mouth gaping upright."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-6">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>2. The sufferings of these two, and the pity it excited in him. As in Shakespeare, <i>Othello</i>, IV. 1: "But yet the pity of it, Iago!—O Iago, the pity of it, Iago!"</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>7. In this third circle are punished the Gluttons. Instead of the feasts of former days, the light, the warmth, the comfort, the luxury, and "the frolic wine" of dinner tables, they have the murk and the mire, and the "rain eternal, maledict, and cold, and heavy;" and are barked at and bitten by the dog in the yard.</p>
							<p>Of Gluttony, Chaucer says in <i>The Persones Tale</i>, p. 239:—</p>
							<p>"He that is usant to this sinne of glotonie, he ne may no sinne withstond, he must be in servage of all vices, for it is the devils horde, ther he hideth him and resteth. This sinne hath many spices. The first is dronkennesse, that is the horrible sepulture of mannes reson: and therefore whan a man is dronke, he hath lost his reson: and this is dedly sinne. But sothly, whan that a man is not wont to strong drinkes, and peraventure nc knoweth not the strength of the drinke, or hath feblenesse in his hed, or hath travailled, thurgh which he drinketh the more, al be he sodenly caught with drinke, it is no dedly sinne, but venial. The second spice of glotonie is, that the spirit of a man wexeth all trouble for dronkennesse, and bereveth a man the discretion of his wit. The thridde spice of glotonie is, whan a man devoureth his mete, and hath not rightful maner of eting. The fourthe is, whan thurgh the gret abundance of his mete, the humours in his body ben distempered. The fifthe is, foryetfulnesse by to moche drinking, for which sometime a man forgeteth by the morwe, what he did over eve."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>52. It is a question whether <i>Ciacco</i>, Hog, is the real name of this person, or a nickname. Boccaccio gives him no other. He speaks of him, <i>Comento</i>, VI., as a noted diner-out in Florence, "who frequented the gentry and the rich, and particularly those who ate and drank sumptuously and delicately; and when he was invited by them to dine, he went; and likewise when he was not invited by them, he invited himself; and for this vice he was well known to all Florentines; though apart from this he was a well-bred man according to his condition, eloquent, affable, and of good feeling; on account of which he was welcomed by every gentleman."</p>
							<p>The following story from the <i>Decamerone</i>, Gior. IX., Nov. viii., translation of 1684, presents a lively picture of social life in Florence in Dante's time, and is interesting for the glimpse it gives, not only of Ciacco, but of Philippo Argenti, who is spoken of hereafter. Canto VIII. 61. The Corso Donati here mentioned is the Leader of the Neri. His violent death is predicted, <i>Purg</i>. XXIV. 82:—</p>
							<p>"There dwelt somtime in Florence one that was generally called by the name of Ciacco, a man being the greatest Gourmand and grossest Feeder as ever was seen in any Countrey, all his means and procurements meerly unable to maintain expences for filling his belly. But otherwise he was of sufficient and commendable carriage, fairly demeaned, and well discoursing on any Argument: yet not as a curious and spruce Courtier, but rather a frequenter of rich mens Tables, where choice of good chear is seldom wanting, and such should have his Company, albeit not invited, he had the Courage to bid himself welcome.</p>
							<p>"At the same time, and in our City of Florence also, there was another man named Biondello, very low of stature, yet comely formed, quick witted, more neat and brisk than a Butterflie, always wearing a wrought silk Cap on his head, and not a hair standing out of order, but the tuft flourishing above the forehead, and he such another trencher flie for the Table, as our forenamed Ciacco was. It so fell out on a morning in the Lent time, that he went into the Fish-market, where he bought two goodly Lampreys for Messer Viero de Cerchi, and was espyed by Ciacco, who, coming to Biondello, said, 'What is the meaning of this cost, and for whom is it?' Whereto Biondello thus answered, 'Yesternight three other Lampreys, far fairer than these, and a whole Sturgeon, were sent unto Messer Corso Donati, and being not sufficient to feed divers Gentlemen, whom he hath invited this day to dine with him, he caused me to buy these two beside: Dost not thou intend to make one of them?' 'Yes, I warrant thee,' replyed Ciacco, 'thou knowest I can invite my self thither, without any other bidding.'</p>
							<p>"So parting, about the hour of dinner time Ciacco went to the house of Messer Corso, whom he found sitting and talking with certain of his Neighbours, but dinner was not as yet ready, neither were they come thither to dinner. Messer Corso demanded of Ciacco, what news with him, and whether he went? 'Why Sir,' said Ciacco, 'I come to dine with you, and your good Company.' Whereto Messer Corso answered. That he was welcome: and his other friends being gone, dinner was served in, none else thereat present but Messer Corso and Ciacco: all the diet being a poor dish of Pease, a little piece of Tunny, and a few small fishes fryed, without any other dishes to follow after. Ciacco seeing no better fare, but being disappointed of his expectation, as longing to feed on the Lampreys and Sturgeon, and so to have made a full dinner indeed, was of a quick apprehension, and apparently perceived that Biondello had meerly gull'd him in a knavery, which did not a little vex him, and made him vow to be revenged on Biondello, as he could compass occasion afterward.</p>
							<p>"Before many days were past, it was his fortune to meet with Biondello, who having told his jest to divers of his friends, and much good merryment made thereat: he saluted Ciacco in a kind manner, saying, 'How didst thou like the fat Lampreys and Sturgeon which thou fed'st on at the house of Messer Corso?' 'Well, Sir,' answered Ciacco, 'perhaps before Eight days pass over my head, thou shalt meet with as pleasing a dinner as I did.' So, parting away from Biondello, he met with a Porter, such as are usually sent on Errands; and hyring him to do a message for him, gave him a glass Bottle, and bringing him near to the Hall-house of Cavicciuli, shewed him there a Knight, called Signior Philippo Argenti, a man of huge stature, very cholerick, and sooner moved to Anger than any other man. 'To him thou must go with this Bottle in thy hand, and say thus to him. Sir, Biondello sent me to you, and courteously entreateth you, that you would erubinate this glass Bottle with your best Claret Wine; because he would make merry with a few friends of his. But beware he lay no hand on thee, because he may be easily induced to misuse thee, and so my business be disappointed.' 'Well, Sir,' said the Porter, 'shall I say any thing else unto him?' 'No,' quoth Ciacco, 'only go and deliver this message, and when thou art returned, I'll pay thee for thy pains.' The Porter being gone to the house, delivered his message to the Knight, who, being a man of no great civil breeding, but very furious, presently conceived that Biondello, whom he knew well enough, sent this message in meer mockage of him, and, starting up with fierce looks, said, 'What erubination of Claret should I send him? and what have I to do with him or his drunken friends? Let him and thee go hang your selves together.' So he stept to catch hold on the Porter, but he being nimble and escaping from him, returned to Ciacco and told him the answer of Philippe. Ciacco, not a little contented, payed the Porter, tarried in no place till he met Biondello, to whom he said, * When wast thou at the Hall of Cavicciuli?' 'Not a long while,' answered Biondello; 'but why dost thou demand such a question?' 'Because,' quoth Ciacco, 'Signior Philippe hath sought about for thee, yet know not I what he would have with thee.' 'Is it so,' replied Biondello, 'then I will walk thither presently, to understand his pleasure,'</p>
							<p>"When Biondello was thus parted from him, Ciacco followed not far off behind him, to behold the issue of this angry business; and Signior Philippo, because he could not catch the Porter, continued much distempered, fretting and fuming, because he could not comprehend the meaning of the Porter's message, but only surmised that Biondello, by the procurement of some body else, had done this in scorn of him. While he remained thus deeply discontented, he espyed Biondello coming towards him, and meeting him by the way, he stept close to him and gave him a cruel blow on the Face, causing his Nose to fall out a bleeding. 'Alas, Sir,' said Biondello, 'wherefore do you strike me?' Signior Philippo, catching him by the hair of the head, trampled his Night Cap in the dirt, and his Cloak also, when, laying many violent blows on him, he said, 'Villanous Traitor as thou art, I'll teach thee what it is to erubinate with Claret, either thy self or any of thy cupping Companions. Am I a Child to be jested withal?'</p>
							<p>"Nor was he more furious in words than in stroaks also, beating him about the Face, hardly leaving any hair on his head, and dragging him along in the mire, spoiling all his Garments, and he not able, from the first blow given, to speak a word in defence of himself. In the end Signior Philippo having extreamly beaten him, and many poople gathering about them, to succour a man so much misused, the matter was at large related, and manner of the message sending. For which they all did greatly reprehend Biondello, considering he knew what kind of man Philippo was, not any way to be jested withal. Biondello in tears maintained that he never sent any such message for Wine, or intended it in the least degree; so, when the tempest was more mildly calmed, and Biondello, thus cruelly beaten and durtied, had gotten home to his own house, he could then remember that (questionless) this was occasioned by Ciacco.</p>
							<p>"After some few days were passed over, and the hurts in his face indifferently cured, Biondello beginning to walk abroad again, chanced to meet with Ciacco, who, laughing heartily at him, said, 'Tell me, Biondello, how dost thou like the erubinating Claret of Signior Philippo?' 'As well,' quoth Biondello, 'as thou didst the Sturgeon and Lampreys at Messer Corso Donaties.' 'Why then,' said Ciacco, 'let these tokens continue familiar between thee and me, when thou wouldest bestow such another dinner on me, then will I erubinate thy Nose with a Bottle of the same Claret.' But Biondello perceived to his cost that he had met with the worser bargain, and Ciacco got cheer without any blows; and therefore desired a peaceful! attonement, each of them always after abstaining from flouting one another."</p>
							<p>Ginguene, <i>Hist. Lit. de l' Italie</i>, II. 53, takes Dante severely to task for wasting his pity upon poor Ciacco, but probably the poet had pleasant memories of him at Florentine banquets in the olden time. Nor is it remarkable that he should be mentioned only by his nickname. Mr. ForsytJi calls Italy "the land of nicknames." He says in continuation, <i>Italy</i>, p. 145:—</p>
							<p>"Italians have suppressed the surnames of their principal artists under various designations. Many are known only by the names of their birthplace, as Correggio, Bassano, etc. Some by those of their masters, as Il Salviati, Sansovino, etc. Some by their father's trade, as Andrea del Sarto, Tintoretto, etc. Some by their bodily defects, as Guercino, Cagnacci, etc. Some by the subjects in which they excelled, as M. Angelo delle battaglie, Agostino dellc perspettive. A few (I can recollect only four) are known, each as the <em>prince</em> of his respective school, by their Christian names alone: Michael Angelo, Raphael, Guido, Titian."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>65. The Bianchi are called the <i>Parte selvaggia</i>, because its leaders, the Cerchi, came from the forest lands of Val di Sieve. The other party, the Neri, were led by the Donati. The following account of these factions is from Giovanni Fiorentino, a writer of the fourteenth century; <i>Il Pecorone</i>, Gior. XIII. Nov. i., in Roscoe's <i>Italian Novelists</i>, I. 327.</p>
							<p>"In the city of Pistoia, at the time of its greatest splendor, there flourished a noble family, called the Cancellieri, derived from Messer Cancelliere, who had enriched himself with his commercial transactions. He had numerous sons by two wives, and they were all entitled by their wealth to assume the title of Cavalieri, valiant and worthy men, and in all their actions magnanimous and courteous. And so fast did the various branches of this family spread, that in a short time they numbered a hundred men at arms, and being superior to every other, both in wealth and power, would have still increased, but that a cruel division arose between them, from some rivalship in the affections of a lovely and enchanting girl, and from angry words they proceeded to more angry blows. Separating into two parties, those descended from the first wife took the title of Cancellieri Bianchi, and the others, who were the offspring of the second marriage, were called Cancellieri Neri.</p>
							<p>"Having at last come to action, the Neri were defeated, and wishing to adjust the affair as well as they yet could, they sent their relation, who had offended the opposite party, to entreat forgiveness on the part of the Neri, expecting that such submissive conduct would meet with the compassion it deserved. On arriving in the presence of the Bianchi, who conceived themselves the offended party, the young man, on bended knees, appealed to their feelings for forgiveness, observing, that he had placed himself in their power, that so they might inflict what punishment they judged proper; when several of the younger members of the offended party, seizing on him, dragged him into an adjoining stable, and ordered that his right hand should be severed from his body. In the utmost terror the youth, with tears in his eyes, besought them to have mercy, and to take a greater and nobler revenge, by pardoning one whom they had it in their power thus deeply to injure. But heedless of his prayers, they bound his hand by force upon the manger, and struck it off; a deed which excited the utmost tumult throughout Pistoia, and such indignation and reproaches from the injured party of the Neri, as to implicate the whole city in a division of interests between them and the Bianchi, which led to many desperate encounters.</p>
							<p>"The citizens, fearful lest the faction might cause insurrections throughout the whole territory, in conjunction with the Guelfs, applied to the Florentines in order to reconcile them; on which the Florentines took possession of the place, and sent the partisans on both sides to the confines of Florence, whence it happened that the Neri sought refuge in the house of the Frescobaldi, and the Bianchi in that of the Cerchi nel Garbo, owing to the relationship which existed between them. The seeds of the same dissension being thus sown in Florence, the whole city became divided, the Cerchi espousing the interests of the Bianchi, and the Donati those of the Neri. "So rapidly did this pestiferous spirit gain ground in Florence, as frequently to excite the greatest tumult; and from a peaceable and flourishing state, it speedily became a scene of rapine and devastation. In this stage Pope Boniface VIII was made acquainted with the state of this ravaged and unhappy city, and sent the Cardinal Acqua Sparta on a mission to reform and pacify the enraged parties. But with his utmost efforts he was unable to make any impression, and accordingly, after declaring the place excommunicated, departed. Florence being thus exposed to the greatest perils, and in a continued state of insurrection, Messer Corso Donati, with the Spini, the Pazzi, the Tosinghi, the Cavicciuli, and the populace attached to the Neri faction, applied, with the consent of their leaders, to Pope Boniface. They entreated that he would employ his interest with the court of France to send a force to allay these feuds, and to quell the party of the Bianchi. As soon as this was reported in the city, Messer Donati was banished, and his property forfeited, and the other heads of the sect were proportionally fined and sent into exile. Messer Donati, arriving at Rome, so far prevailed with his Holiness, that he sent an embassy to Charles de Valois, brother to the king of France, declaring his wish that he should be made Emperor, and King of the Romans; under which persuasion Charles passed into Italy, reinstating Messer Donati and the Neri in the city of Florence. From this there only resulted worse evils, inasmuch as all the Bianchi, being the least powerful, were universally oppressed and robbed, and Charles, becoming the enemy of Pope Boniface, conspired his death, because the Pope had not fulfilled his promise of presenting ,him with an imperial crown. From which events it may be seen that this vile faction was the cause of discord in the cities of Florence and Pistoia, and of the other states of Tuscany; and no Vless to the same source was to be attributed the death of Pope Boniface VIII."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>69. Charles de Valois, called Senzaterra, or Lackland, brother of Philip the Fair, king of France.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>73. The names of these two remain unknown. Probably one of them was Dante's friend Guido Cavalcanti.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>80. Of this Arrigo nothing whatever seems to be known, hardly even his name; for some commentators call him Arrigo dei Fisanti, and others Arrigo dei Fifanti. Of these other men of mark "who set their hearts on doing good," Farinata is among the Heretics, Canto X.; Tegghiaio and Rusticucci among the Sodomites, Canto XVI; and Mosca among the Schismatics, Canto XXVIII.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>106. The philosophy of Aristotle. The same doctrine is taught by St. Augustine: "<i>Cum fiet rcsurrcctio carnis, et bonorum gaudia et tormcnta mahrum major a crunt.</i>"</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>115. Plutus, the God of Riches, of which Lord Bacon says in his <i>Essays</i>:—</p>
							<p>"I cannot call riches better than the baggage of virtue; the Roman word is better, 'impedimenta'; for as the baggage is to an army, so is riches to virtue; it cannot be spared nor left behind, but it hindcreth the march; yea, and the care of it sometimes loseth or disturbeth the victory; of great riches there is no real use, except it be in the distribution; the rest is but conceit... The personal fruition in any man cannot reach to feel great riches: there is a custody of them; or a power of dole and donative of them; or a fame of them; but no solid use to the owner."</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-7">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. In this Canto is described the punishment of the Avaricious and the Prodigal, with Plutus as their jailer. His outcry of alarm is differently interpreted by different commentators, and by none very satisfactorily. The curious student, groping among them for a meaning, is like Gower's young king, of whom he says, in his <i>Confessio Amantis</i>:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"Of deepe ymaginations</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And straunge interpretations,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Problemes and demaundes eke</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His wisedom was to finde and seke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whereof he wolde in sondry wise</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Opposen hem, that weren wise;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But none of hem it mighte here</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon his word to give answere."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>But nearly all agree, I believe, in construing the strange words into a cry of alarm or warning to Lucifer, that his realm is invaded by some unusual apparition.</p>
							<p>Of all the interpretations given, the most amusing is that of Benvenuto Cellini, in his description of the Court of Justice in Paris, Roscoe's <i>Memoirs of Benvenuto Cellini</i>, Chap. XXII:—</p>
							<p>"I stooped down several times to observe what passed: the words which I heard the judge utter, upon seeing two gentlemen who wanted to hear the trial, and whom the porter was endeavoring to keep out, were these: 'Be quiet, be quiet, Satan, get hence, and leave off disturbing us.' The terms were, <i>Paix</i>, <i>paix</i>, Satan, <i>allez</i>, <i>paix</i>. As I had by this time thoroughly learnt the French language, upon hearing these words, I recollected what Dante said, when he with his master, Virgil, entered the gates of hell; for Dante and Giotto the painter were together in France, and visited Paris with particular attention, where the court of justice may be considered as hell. Hence it is that Dante, who was likewise perfect master of the French, made use of that expression; and I have often been surprised, that it was never understood in that sense; so that I cannot help thinking, that the commentators on this author have often made him say things which he never so much as dreamed of."</p>
							<p>Dante himself hardly seems to have understood the meaning of the words, though he suggests that Virgil did.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>11. The overthrow of the Rebel Angels. St. Augustine says, "<i>Idolatria et qucelibet noxia superstitio fornicatio est.</i>"</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>24. Must dance the <i>Ridda</i>, a round dance of the olden time. It was a Roundelay, or singing and dancing together. Boccaccio's Monna Belcolore " knew better than any one how to play the tambourine and lead the Ridda."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>27. As the word honor resounds in Canto IV., and the word love in Canto v., so here the words rolling and turning are the burden of the song, as if to suggest the motion of Fortune's wheel, so beautifully described a little later.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>39. Clerks, clerics, or clergy. Boccaccio, <i>Comento</i>, remarks upon this passage: "Some maintain, that the clergywear the tonsure in remembrance and reverence of St. Peter, on whom, they say, it was made by certain evil-minded men as a mark of madness; because not comprehending and not wishing to comprehend his holy doctrine, and seeing him fervently preaching before princes and people, who held that doctrine in detestation, they thought he acted as one out of his senses. Others maintain that the tonsure is worn as a mark of dignity, as a sign that those who wear it are more worthy than those who do not; and they call it corona, because, all the rest of the head being shaven, a single circle of hair should be left, which in form of a crown surrounds the whole head."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>58. In like manner Chaucer, Persones Tale, pp. 227, 337, reproves illkeeping and ill-giving.</p>
							<p>"Avarice, after the description of Seint Augustine, is a likerousnesse in herte to have erthly thinges. Som other folk sayn, that avarice is for to purchase many erthly thinges, and nothing to yeve to hem that han nede. And understond wel, that avarice standeth not only in land ne catel, but som time in science and in glorie, and in every maner outrageous thing is avarice</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>"But for as moche as som folk ben unmesurable, men oughten for to avoid and eschue fool-largesse, the whiche men clepen waste. Certes, he that is fool-large, he yeveth not his catel. but he leseth his catel, Sothly, what thing that he yeveth for vaine-glory, as to minstrals, and to folk that here his renome in the world, he hath do sinne thereof, and non almesse: certes, he leseth foule his good, that ne seketh with the yefte of his good nothing but sinne. He is like to an hors that seketh rather to drink drovy or troubled water, than for to drink water of the clere well. And for as moche as they yeven thcr as they shuld nat yeven, to hem apperteineth thilkc malison, that Crist shal yeve at the day of dome to hem that shul be dampned."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>68. The Wheel of Fortune was one of the favorite subjects of art and song in the Middle Ages. On a large square of white marble set in the pavement of the nave of the Cathedral at Siena, is the representation of a revolving wheel. Three boys are climbing and clinging at the sides and below; above is a dignified figure with a stern countenance, holding the sceptre and ball. At the four corners are inscriptions from Seneca, Euripides, Aristotle, and Epictetus. The same symbol may be seen also in the wheel-of-fortune windows of many churches; as, for example, that of San Zcno at Verona. See Knight, <i>Ecclesiastical Architecture</i>, II. plates v., vi.</p>
							<p>In the following poem Guido Cavalcanti treats this subject in Very much the same way that Dante docs; and it is curious to observe how at particular times certain ideas seem to float in the air, and to become the property of every one who chooses to make use of them. From the similarity between this poem and the lines of Dante, one might infer that the two friends had discussed the matter in conversation, and afterwards that each had written out their common thought.</p>
							<p>Cavalcanti's <i>Song of Fortune</i>, as translated by Rossetti, <i>Early Italian Poets</i>, p. 366, runs as follows:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"Lo! I am she who makes the wheel to turn;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lo! I am she who gives and takes away;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Blamed idly, day by day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In all mine acts by you, ye humankind.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For whoso smites his visage and doth mourn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What time he renders back my gifts to me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Learns then that I decree</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No state which mine own arrows may not find.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who clomb must fall:—this bear ye well in mind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor say, because he fell, I did him wrong.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet mine is a vain song:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For truly ye may find out wisdom when</span>
									<br/>
									<span>King Arthur's resting-place is found of men.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>"Ye make great marvel and astonishment</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What time ye see the sluggard lifted up</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the just man to drop.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ye complain on God and on my sway.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O humankind, ye sin in your complaint:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For He, that Lord who made the world to live.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lets me not take or give</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By mine own act, but as he wills I may.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet is the mind of man so castaway,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That it discerns not the supreme behest.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alas! ye wretchedest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And chide ye at God also? Shall not He</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Judge between good and evil righteously?</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>"Ah! had ye knowledge how God evermore.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With agonies of soul and grievous heats,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As on an anvil beats</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On them that in this earth hold high estate—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ye would choose little rather than much store,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And solitude than spacious palaces;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such is the sore disease</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of anguish that on all their days doth wait.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Behold if they be not unfortunate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When oft the father dares not trust the son!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O wealth, with thee is won</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A worm to gnaw forever on his soul</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose abject life is laid in thy control!</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>"If also ye take note what piteous death</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They ofttimes make, whose hoards were manifold,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who cities had and gold</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And multitudes of men beneath their hand;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then he among you that most angereth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall bless me saying, 'Lo! I worship thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I was not as he</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose death is thus accurst throughout the land.'</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But now your living souls are held in band</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of avarice, shutting you from the true light</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which shows how sad and slight</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are this world's treasured riches and array</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That still change hands a hundred times a day.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>"For me—could envy enter in my sphere,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which of all human taint is clean and quit—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I well might harbor it</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When I behold the peasant at his toil.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Guiding his team, untroubled, free from fear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He leaves his perfect furrow as he goes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And gives his field repose</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From thorns and tares and weeds that vex the soil:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thereto he labors, and without turmoil</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Entrusts his work to God, content if so</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such guerdon from it grow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That in that year his family shall live:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor care nor thought to other things will give.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>"But now ye may no more have speech of me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For this mine office craves continual use:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ye therefore deeply muse</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon those things which ye have heard the while:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yea, and even yet remember heedfully</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How this my wheel a motion hath so fieet.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That in an eyelid's beat</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Him whom it raised it maketh low and vile.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>None was, nor is, nor shall be of such guile,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who could, or can, or shall, I say, at length</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Prevail against my strength.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But still those men that are my questioners</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In bitter torment own their hearts perverse.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>"Song, that wast made to carry high intent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dissembled in the garb of humbleness—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With fair and open face</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Master Thomas let thy course be bent.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say that a great thing scarcely may be pent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In little room: yet always pray that he</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commend us, thee and me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To them that are more apt in lofty speech:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For truly one must learn ere he can teach."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>74. This old Rabbinical tradition of the "Regents of the Planets" has been painted by Raphael, in the Capella Chigiana of the Church of Santa Maria del Popolo in Rome. See Mrs. Jameson, <i>Sacred and Legendary Art</i>, I. 45. She says: "As a perfect example of grand and poetical feeling I may cite the angels as 'Regents of the Planets' in the Capella Chigiana. The Cupola represents in a circle the creation of the solar system, according to the theological (or rather astrological) notions which then prevailed—a hundred years before 'the starry Galileo and his woes.' In the centre is the Creator; around, in eight compartments, we have, first, the angel of the celestial sphere, who seems to be listening to the divine mandate, 'Let there be lights in the firmament of heaven'; then follow, in their order, the Sun, the Moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. The name of each planet is expressed by its mythological representative; the Sun by Apollo, the Moon by Diana; and over each presides a grand, colossal winged spirit, seated or reclining on a portion of the zodiac as on a throne."</p>
							<p>The old tradition may be found in Stehelin, <i>Rabbinical Literature</i>, I. 157. See Purgatorio, XVI. 69.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>98. Past midnight.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>103. <i>Perse</i>, purple-black. See Canto v. Note 89.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>115. "Is not this a cursed vice?" says Chaucer in <i>The Persones Tale</i>, p. 202, speaking of wrath. "Yes, certes. Alas! it benimmeth fro man his witte and his reson, and all his debonaire lif spirituel, that shulde keepe his soule. Certes it benimmeth also Goddes due lordship (and that is mannes soule) and the love of his neighbours; it reveth him the quiet of his herte, and subverteth his soule."</p>
							<p>And farther on he continues: "After the sinne of wrath, now wolle I speke of the sinne of accidie, or slouth; for envie blindeth the herte of a man, and ire trouhleth a man, and accidie maketh him hevy, thoughttul, and wrawe. Envie and ire maken bitternesse in herte, which bitternesse is mother of accidie, and benimmeth him the love of alle goodncsse; than is accidie the anguish of a trouble herte."</p>
							<p>And Burton, <i>Anatomy of Melancholy</i>, I. 3. i. 3, speaking of that kind of melancholy which proceeds from " humors adust," says: "For example, if it proceeds from flegm (which is seldom, and not so frequent as the rest) it stirs up dull symptomcs, and a kind of stupidity, or impassionate hurt; they are sleepy, saith Savanarola, dull, slow, cold, blockish, ass-like, <i>asininam melancholiam</i> Melancthon calls it, they are much given to weeping, and delight in waters, ponds, pools, rivers, fishing, fowling, etc. They are pale of color. slothful, apt to sleep, heavy, much troubled with the head-ache, continual meditation and muttering to themselves, they dream of waters, that they are in danger of drowning, and fear such things."</p>
							<p>See also <i>Purg</i>. XVII. 85.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-8">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. Boccaccio and some other commentators think the words "I say, continuing," are a confirmation of the theory that the first seven cantos of the Inferno were written before Dante's banishment from Florence. Others maintain that the words suggest only the continuation of the subject of the last canto in this.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>4. These two signal fires announce the arrival of two persons to be ferried over the wash, and the other in the distance is on the watch-tower of the City of Dis, answering these.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>19. Phlegyas was the father of Ixion and Coronis. He was king of the Lapithas, and burned the temple of Apollo at Delphi to avenge the wrong done by the god to Coronis. His punishment in the infernal regions was to stand beneath a huge impending rock, always about to fall upon him. Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i>, VI., says of him: "Phlegyas, most wretched, is a monitor to all and with loud voice proclaims through the shades, 'Being warned, learn righteousness, and not to contemn the gods.'"</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>27. Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i>, VI.: "The boat of sewn hide groaned under the weight, and, being leaky, took in much water from the lake."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>49. Mr. Wright here quotes Spenser, <i>Ruins of Time</i>:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"How many great ones may remembered be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who in their days most famously did flourish,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of whom no word we have, nor sign now see,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But as things wiped out with a sponge do perish."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>51. Chaucer's "sclandre of his diffame."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>61. Of Philippo Argenti little is known, and nothing to his credit. Dante seems to have an especial personal hatred of him, as if in memory of some disagreeable passage between them in the streets of Florence. Boccaccio says of him in his <i>Comento</i>: "This Philippo Argenti, as Coppo di Borghese Domenichi de' Cavicciuli was wont to say, was a very rich gentleman, so rich that he had the horse he used to ride shod with silver, and from this he had his surname; he was in person large, swarthy, muscular, of marvellous strength, and at the slightest Inferno ix. 251 provocation the most irascible of men; nor are any more known of his qualities than these two, each in itself very blameworthy," He was of the Adimari family, and of the Ncri faction; while Dante was of the Bianchi party, and in banishment. Perhaps this fact may explain the bitterness of his invective.</p>
							<p>This is the same Philippo Argenti who figures in Boccaccio's tale. See Inf. VI., note 52, The <i>Ottimo Comento</i> says of him: "He was a man of great pomp, and great ostentation, and much expenditure, and little virtue and worth; and therefore the author says, 'Goodness is none that decks his memory.'"</p>
							<p>And this is all that is known of the "<i>Fiorentino spirito bizzaro,</i>" forgotten by history, and immortalized in song. "What a barbarous strength and confusion of ideas," exclaims Leigh Hunt, <i>Italian Poets</i>, p. 60, "is there in this whole passage about him! Arrogance punished by arrogance, a Christian mother blessed for the unchristian disdainfulness of her son, revenge boasted of and enjoyed, passion arguing in a circle."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>70. The word "mosques" paints at once to the imagination the City of Unbelief.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>78. Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i>, VI., Davidson's Translation:—</p>
							<p>"Aeneas on a sudden looks back, and under a rock on the left sees vast prisons inclosed with a triple wall, which Tartarean Phlcgethon's rapid flood environs with torrents of flame, and whirls roaring rocks along. Fronting is a huge gate, with columns of solid adamant, that no strength of men, nor the gods themselves, can with steel demolish. An iron tower rises aloft; and there wakeful Tisiphone, with her bloody robe tucked up around her, sits to watch the vestibule both night and day."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>124. This arrogance of theirs; <i>tracotanza</i>, <i>oltracotanza</i>; Brantome's <i>outrecuidance</i>; and Spenser's <i>surquedrie</i>.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>125. The gate of the Inferno.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>130. The coming of the Angel, whose approach is described in the next canto, beginning at line 64.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-9">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. The flush of anger passes from Virgil's cheek on seeing the pallor of Dante's, and he tries to encourage him with assurances of success; but betrays  his own apprehensions in the broken phrase, "If not," which he immediately covers with words of cheer.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>8. Such, or so great a one, is Beatrice, the "fair and saintly Lady" of Virgil's cheek on seeing the pallor of Canto II. 53.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>9. The Angel who will open the gates of the City ot Dis.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>16. Dante seems to think that he has already reached the bottom ot the infernal conch, with its many convolutions.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>52. Gower, <i>Confessio Amantis</i>, I.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"Cast nought thin eye upon Meduse</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thou be turned into stone."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>Hawthorne has beautifully told the story of "The Gorgon's Head," as well as many more of the classic fables, in his <i>Wonder-Book</i>.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>54. The attempt which Theseus and Pirithous made to rescue Proserpine from the infernal regions.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>62. The hidden doctrine seems to be, that Negation or Unbelief is the Gorgon's head which changes the heart to stone; after which there is "no more returning upward." The Furies display it from the walls of the City of Heretics.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>112. At Aries lie buried, according to old tradition, the Peers of Charlemagne and their ten thousand men at arms. Archbishop Turpin, in his famous <i>History of Charles the Great</i>, XXX., Rodd's Translation, I. 52, says:—</p>
							<p>"After this the King and his army proceeded by the way of Gascony and Thoulouse, and came to Aries, where we found the army of Burgundy, which had left us in the hostile valley, bringing their dead by the way of Morbihan and Thoulouse, to bury them in the plain of Aries. Here we performed the rites of Estolfo, Count of Champagne; of Solomon; Sampson, Duke of Burgundy; Arnold of Berlanda; Alberic of Burgundy; Gumard, Esturinite, Hato, Juonius, Berard, Berengaire, and Naaman, Duke of Bourbon, and of ten thousand of their soldiers."</p>
							<p>Bocccacio comments upon these tombs as follows:—</p>
							<p>"At Arles, somewhat out of the city, are many tombs of stone, made of old for sepulchres, and some are large, and some are small, and some are better sculptured, and some not so well, peradventure according to the means of those who had them made; and upon some of them appear inscriptions after the ancient custom, I suppose in indication of those who are buried within. The inhabitants of. the country repeat a tradition of them, affirming that in that place there was once a great battle between William of Orange, or some other Christian prince, with his forces on one side, and infidel barbarians from Africa [on the other]; and that many Christians were slain in it; and that on the following night, by divine miracle, those tombs were brought there for the burial of the Christians, and so on the following morning all the dead Christians were buried in them."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>113. Pola is a city in Istria. "Near Pola," says Benvenuto da Imola, "are seen many tombs, about seven hundred, and of various forms."</p>
							<p>Quarnaro is a gulf of the northern extremity of the Adriatic.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-10">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>I. In this Canto is described the punishment of Heretics.</p>
							<p>Brunetto Latini, <i>Tesoretto</i>, XIII.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"Or va mastro Brunetto</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Per lo cammino stretto."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>14. Sir Thomas Browne, <i>Urn Burial</i>, Chap. IV., says: "They may sit in the orchestra and noblest seats of heaven who have held up shaking hands in the fire, and humanly contended for glory. Meanwhile Epicurus lies deep in Dante's hell, wherein we meet with tombs enclosing souls, which denied their immortalities. But whether the virtuous heathen, who lived better than he spake, or, erring in the principles of himself, yet lived above philosophers of more specious maxims, lie so deep as he is placed, at least so low as not to rise against Christians, who, believing or knowing that truth, have lastingly denied it in their practice and conversation—were a query too sad to insist on."</p>
							<p>Also Burton, <i>Anatomy of Melancholy</i>, Part II. Sec. 2. Mem. 6. Subs, i, thus vindicates the memory of Epicurus: "A quiet mind is that <i>voluptas</i>, or <i>summum bonum</i> of Epicurus; <i>non dolere, curis vacare, animo tranquillo esse</i>, not to grieve, but to want cares, and have a quiet soul, is the only pleasure of the world, as Seneca truly recites his opinion, not that of eating and drinking, which injurious Aristotle maliciously puts upon him, and for which he is still mistaken, <i>mala audit et vapulat</i>, slandered without a cause, and lashed by all posterity."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>32. Farinata degli Uberti was the most valiant and renowned leader of the Ghibellines in Florence. Boccaccio, <i>Comento</i>, says: "He was of the opinion of Epicurus, that the soul dies with the body, and consequently maintained that human happiness consisted in temporal pleasures; but he did not follow these in the way that Epicurus did, that is by making long fasts to have afterwards pleasure in eating dry bread; but was fond of good and delicate viands, and ate them without waiting to be hungry; and for this sin he is damned as a Heretic in this place."</p>
							<p>Farinata led the Ghibellines at the famous battle of Monte Aperto in i 260, where the Guelfs were routed, and driven out of Florence. He died in I 264.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>46. The ancestors of Dante, and Dante himself, were Guelfs. He did not become a Ghibelline till after his banishment. Boccaccio in his Life of Dante makes the following remarks upon his party spirit. I take the passage as given in Mrs. Bunbury's translation of Balbo's <i>Life and Times of Dante</i>, II. 227.</p>
							<p>"He was," says Boccaccio, "a most excellent man, and most resolute in adversity. It was only on one subject that he showed himself, I do not know whether I ought to call it impatient, or spirited,—it was regarding anything relating to Party; since in his exile he was more violent in this respect than suited his circumstances, and more than he was willing that others should believe. And in order that it may be seen for what party he was thus violent and pertinacious, it appears to me I must go further back in my story. I believe that it was the just anger of God that permitted, it is a long time ago, almost all Tuscany and Lombardy to be divided into two parties; I do not know how they acquired those names, but one party was called Guelf and the other party Ghibelline. And these two names were so revered, and had such an eiFect on the folly of many minds, that, for the sake of defending the side any one had chosen for his own against the opposite party, it was not considered hard to lose property, and even life, if it were necessary. And under these names the Italian cities many times suffered serious grievances and changes; and among the rest our city, which was sometimes at the head of one party, and sometimes of the other, according to the citizens in power; so much so that Dante's ancestors, being Guelfs, were twice expelled by the Ghibellines from their home, and he likewise under the title of Guelf held the reins of the Florentine Republic, from which he was expelled, as we have shown, not by the the Ghibellines, but by the Guelfs; and seeing that he could not return, he so much altered his mind that there never was a fiercer Ghibelline, or a bitterer enemy to the Guelfs, than he was. And that which I feel most ashamed at for the sake of his memory is, that it was a well-known thing in Romagna, that if any boy or girl, talking to him on party matters, condemned the Ghibelline side, he would become frantic, so that if they did not be silent he would have been induced to throw stones at them; and with this violence of party feeling he lived until his death. I am certainly ashamed to tarnish with any fault the fame of such a man; but the order of my subject in some degree demands it, because if I were silent in those things in which he was to blame, I should not be believed in those things I have already related in his praise. Therefore I excuse myself to himself, who perhaps looks down from heaven with a disdainful eye on me writing."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>51. The following account of the Guelfs and Ghibellines is from the Pecorone of Giovanni Fiorentino, a writer of the fourteenth century. It forms the first Novella of the Eighth Day, and will be found in Roscoe's Italian Novelists, I. 322.</p>
							<p>"There formerly resided in Germany two wealthy and well-born individuals, whose names were Guelfo and Ghibellino, very near neighbors, and greatly attached to each other. But returning together one day from the chase, there unfortunately arose some difference of opinion as to the merits of one of their hounds, which was maintained on both sides so very warmly, that, from being almost inseparable friends and companions, they became each other's deadliest enemies. This unlucky division between them still increasing, they on either side collected parties of their followers, in order more effectually to annoy each other. Soon extending its malignant influence among the neighboring lords and barons of Germany, who divided, according to their motives, either with the Guelf or the Ghibelline, it not only produced many serious affrays, but several persons fell victims to its rage. Ghibellino, finding himself hard pressed by his enemy, and unable longer to keep the field against him, resolved to apply for assistance to Frederick the First, the reigning Emperor. Upon this, Guelfo, perceiving that his adversary sought the alliance of this monarch, applied on his side to Pope Honorius II., who being at variance with the former, and hearing how the affair stood, immediately joined the cause of the Guelfs, the Emperor having already embraced that of the Ghibellines. It is thus that the apostolic see became connected with the former, and the empire with the latter faction; and it was thus that a vile hound became the origin of a deadly hatred between the two noble families. Now it happened that in the year of our dear Lord and Redeemer 1215, the same pestiferous spirit spread itself into parts of Italy, in the following manner. Messer Guido Orlando being at that time chief magistrate of Florence, there likewise resided in that city a noble and valiant cavalier of the family of Buondclmonti, one of the most distinguished houses in the state. Our young Buondelmonce having already plighted his troth to a lady of the Amidei family, the lovers were considered as betrothed, with all the solemnity usually observed on such occasions. But this unfortunate young man, chancing one day to pass by the house of the Donati, was stopped and accosted by a lady of the name of Lapaccia, who moved to him from her door as he went along, saying: 'I am surprised that a gentleman of your appearance, Signor, should think of taking for his wife a woman scarcely worthy of handing him his boots. There is a child of my own, whom, to speak sincerely, I have long intended for you, and whom I wish you would just venture to see.' And on this she called out for her daughter, whose name was Ciulla, one of the prettiest and most enchanting girls in all Florence. Introducing her to Messer Buondelmonte, she whispered, 'This is she whom I had reserved for you'; and the young Florentine, suddenly becoming enamored of her, thus replied to her mother, 'I am quite ready. Madonna, to meet your wishes'; and before stirring from the spot he placed a ring upon her finger, and, wedding her, received her there as his wife.</p>
							<p>"The Amidei, hearing that young Buondelmonte had thus espoused another, immediately met together, and took counsel with other friends and relations, how they might best avenge themselves for such an insult offered to their house. There were present among the rest Lambertuccio Amidei, Schiatta Ruberti, and Mosca Lamberti, one of whom proposed to give him a box on the ear, another to striie him in the face; yet they were none of them able to agree about it among themselves. On observing this, Mosca hastily rose, in a great passion, saying, '<i>Cosa fatta capo ha,</i>' wishing it to be understood that a dead man will never strike again. It was therefore decided that he should be put to death, a sentence which they proceeded to execute in the following manner.</p>
							<p>"M. Buondelmonte returning one Easter morning from a visit to the Casa Bardi, beyond the Arno, mounted upon a snow-white steed, and dressed in a mantle of the same color, had just reached the foot of the Ponte Vecchio, or old bridge, where formerly stood a statue of Mars, whom the Florentines in their Pagan state were accustomed to worship, when the whole party issued out upon him, and, dragging him in the scuffle from his horse, in spite of the gallant resistance he made, despatched him with a thousand wounds. The tidings of this affair seemed to throw all Florence into confusion; the chief personages and noblest families in the place everywhere meeting, and dividing themselves into parties in consequence; the one party embracing the cause of the Buondelmonti, who placed themselves at the head of the Guelfs; and the other taking part with the Amidei, who supported the Ghibellines.</p>
							<p>"In the same fatal manner, nearly all the seigniories and cities of Italy were involved in the original quarrel between these two German families: the Guelfs still supporting the interest of the Holy Church, and the Ghibellines those of the Emperor. And thus I have made you acquainted with the origin of the Germanic faction, between two noble houses, for the sake of a vile cur, and have shown how it afterwards disturbed the peace of Italy for the sake of a beautiful woman."</p>
							<p>For an account of the Bianchi and Neri factions see Canto XXIV. note 143.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>53. Cavalcante de' Cavalcanti, father of Dante's friend, Guido Cavalcanti. He was of the Guelf party; so that here are Guelf and Ghibelline buried in the same tomb.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>60. This question recalls the scene in the Odyssey, where the shade of Agamemnon appears to Ulysses and asks for Orestes. Book XI. in Chapman's translation, line 603:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"Doth my son yet survive</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In Orchomen or Pylos? Or doth live</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In Sparta with his uncle? Yet I see</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Divine Orestes is not here with me."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>63. Guido Cavalcanti, whom Benvenuto da Imola calls "the other eye of Florence,"—<i>alter oculus Florentine tempore Dantis</i>. It is to this Guido that Dante addresses the sonnet, which is like the breath of Spring, beginning:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Guido, I wish that Lapo, thou, and I Could be by spells conveyed, as it were now, Upon a barque, with all the winds that blow, Across all seas at our good will to hie."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>He was a poet of decided mark, as may be seen by his "Song of Fortune," quoted in Note 68, Canto VII., and the Sonnet to Dante, Note 136, Purgatorio XXX. But he seems not to have shared Dante's admiration for Virgil, and to have been more given to the study of philosophy than of poetry. Like Lucentio in "The Taming of the Shrew" he is</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"So devote to Aristotle's ethics</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As Ovid be an outcast quite abjured."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>Boccaccio, <i>Decameron</i>, VI. 9, praises him for his learning and other good qualities; "for over and beside his being one of the best Logitians, as those times not yielded a better," so runs the old translation, "he was also a most absolute Natural Philosopher, a very friendly Gentleman, singularly well spoken, and whatsoever else was commendable in any man was no way wanting in him." In the same Novella he tells this anecdote of him:—</p>
							<p>"It chanced upon a day that Signior Guido, departing from the Church of Saint Michael d' Horta, and passing along by the Adamari, so far as to Saint John's Church, which evermore was his customary walk: many goodly Marble Tombs were then about the said Church, as now adays are at Saint Reparata, and divers more beside. He entring among the Columns of Porphiry, and the other Sepulchers being there, because the door of the Church was shut: Signior Betto and his Company came riding from Saint Reparata, and espying Signior Guido among the Graves and Tombs, said, 'Come, let us go make some jests to anger him.' So putting the Spurs to their Horses they rode apace towards him; and being upon him before hee perceived them, one of them said, 'Guido, thou refusest to be one of our society, and seekest for that which never was: when thou hast found it, tell us, what wilt thou do with it?'</p>
							<p>"Guido seing himself round engirt with them, suddenly thus replyed: 'Gentlemen, you may use me in your own House as you please.' And setting his hand upon one of the Tombs (which was somewhat great) he took his rising, and leapt quite over it on the further side, as being of an agile and sprightly body, and being thus freed from them, he went away to his own lodging.</p>
							<p>"They stood all like men amazed, strangely looking one upon another, and began afterward to murmur among themselves: That Guido was a man without any understanding, and the answer which he had made unto them was to no purpose, neither savoured of any discretion, but meerly came from an empty Brain, because they had no more to do in the place where now they were, than any of the other Citizens, and Signior Guido (himself) as little as any of them; whereto Signior Betto thus replyed: 'Alas, Gentlemen, it is you your selves that are void of understanding: for, if you had but observed the answer which he made unto us: he did honestly, and (in very few words) not only notably express his own wisdom, but also deservedly reprehend us. Because, if we observe things as we ought to do. Graves and Tombs are the Houses of the dead, ordained and prepared to be the latest dwellings. He told us moreover that although we have here (in this life) our habitations and abidings, yet these (or the like) must at last be our Houses. To let us know, and all other foolish, indiscreet, and unlearned men, that we are worse than dead men, in comparison of him, and other men equal to him in skill and learning. And therefore, while we are here among the Graves and Monuments, it may be well said, that we are not far from our own Houses, or how soon we shall be possessors of them, in regard of the frailty attending on us.'"</p>
							<p>Napier, <i>Florentine History</i>, I. 368, speaks of Guido as "a bold, melancholy man, who loved solitude and literature; but generous, brave, and courteous, a poet and philosopher, and one that seems to have had the respect and admiration of his age." He then adds this singular picture of the times:—</p>
							<p>"Corso Donati, by whom he was feared and hated, would have had him murdered while on a pilgrimage to Saint James of Galicia; on his return this became known and gained him many supporters amongst the Cerchi and other youth of Florence; he took no regular measures of vengeance, but, accidentally meeting Corso in the street, rode violently towards him, casting his javelin at the same time; it missed by the tripping of his horse and he escaped with a slight wound from one of Donati's attendants."</p>
							<p>Sacchetti, Nov. 68, tells a pleasant story of Guido's having his cloak nailed to the bench by a roguish boy, while he was playing chess in one of the streets of Florence, which is also a curious picture of Italian life.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>75. Farinata pays no attention to this outburst of paternal tenderness on the part of his Guelfic kinsman, but waits, in stern indifference, till it is ended, and then calmly resumes his discourse.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>80. The moon, called in the heavens Diana, on earth Luna, and in the infernal regions Proserpina.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>86. In the great battle of Monte Aperto. The river Arbia is a few miles south of Siena. The traveller crosses it on his way to Rome, In this battle the banished Ghibellines of Florence, joining the Sienese, gained a victory over the Guelfs, and retook the city of Florence. Before the battle Buonaguida, Syndic of Siena, presented the keys of the city to the Virgin Mary in the Cathedral, and made a gift to her of the city and the neighboring country. After the battle the standard of the vanquished Florentines, together with their battle-bell, the Martinella, was tied to the tail of a jackass and dragged in the dirt. See Ampere, <i>Voyage Dantesque</i>, 254.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>94. After the battle of Monte Aperto a diet of the Ghibellines was held at Empoli, in which the deputies from Siena and Pisa, prompted no doubt by provincial hatred, urged the demolition of Florence. Farinata vehemently opposed the project in a speech, thus given in Napier, <i>Florentine History</i>, I. 257:—</p>
							<p>"'It would have been better,' he exclaimed, 'to have died on the Arbia, than survive only to hear such a proposition as that which they were then discussing. There is no happiness in victory itself, that must ever be sought for amongst the companions who helped us to gain the day, and the injury we receive from an enemy inflicts a far more trifling wound than the wrong that comes from the hand of a friend. If I now complain, it is not that I fear the destruction of my native city, for as long as I have life to wield a sword Florence shall never be destroyed; but I cannot suppress my indignation at the discourses I have just been listening to: we are here assembled to discuss the wisest means of maintaining our influence in Florence, not to debate on its destruction, and my country would indeed be unfortunate, and I and my companions miserable, mean-spirited creatures, if it were true that the fate of our city depended on the fiat of the present assembly. I did hope that all former hatred would have been banished from such a meeting, and that our mutual destruction would not have been treacherously aimed at from under the false colors of general safety; I did hope that all here were convinced that counsel dictated by jealousy could never be advantageous to the general good! But to what does your hatred attach itself? To the ground on which the city stands? To its houses and insensible walls? To the fugitives who have abandoned it? Or to ourselves that now possess it? Who is he that thus advises? Who is the bold bad man that dare thus give voice to the malice he hath engendered in his soul? Is it meet then that all your cities should exist unharmed, and ours alone be devoted to destruction? That j»a should return in triumph to your hearths, and we with whom you have conquered should have nothing in exchange but exile and the ruin of our country? Is there one of you who can believe that I could even hear such things with patience? Are you indeed ignorant that if I have carried arms, if I have persecuted my foes, I still have never ceased to love my country, and that I never will allow what even our enemies have respected to be violated by your hands, so that posterity may call them the saviours, us the destroyers of our country? Here then I declare, that, although I stand alone amongst the Florentines, I will never permit my native city to be destroyed, and if it be necessary for her sake to die a thousand deaths, I am ready to meet them all in her defence.'</p>
							<p>"Farinata then rose, and with angry gestures quitted the assembly; but lett such an impression on the mind of his audience that the project was instantly dropped, and the only question for the moment was how to regain a chief of such talent and influence,"</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>119. Frederick II., son of the Emperor Henry VI., surnamed the Severe, and grandson of Barbarossa. He reigned from 1220 to 1250, not only as Emperor of Germany, but also as King of Naples and Sicily, where for the most part he held his court, one of the most brilliant of the Middle Ages. Villani, <i>Cronica</i>, V. i, thus sketches his character: "This Frederick reigned thirty years as Emperor, and was a man of great mark and great worth, learned in letters and of natural ability, universal in all things; he knew the Latin language, the Italian, the German, French, Greek, and Arabic; was copiously endowed with all virtues, liberal and courteous in giving, valiant and skilled in arms, and was much feared. And he was dissolute and voluptuous in many ways, and had many concubines and mamelukes, after the Saracenic fashion; he was addicted to all sensual delights, and led an Epicurean life, taking no account of any other; and this was one principal reason why he was an enemy to the clergy and the Holy Church."</p>
							<p>Milman, <i>Lat. Christ.</i>, B. X., Chap, iii., says of him: "Frederick's predilection for his native kingdom, for the bright cities reflected in the blue Mediterranean, over the dark barbaric towns of Germany, of itself characterizes the man. The summer skies, the more polished manners, the more elegant luxuries, the knowledge, the arts, the poetry, the gayety, the beauty, the romance of the South, were throughout his life more congenial to his mind, than the heavier and more chilly climate, the feudal barbarism, the ruder pomp, the coarser habits of his German liegemen And no doubt that delicious climate and lovely land, so highly appreciated by the gay sovereign, was not without influence on the state, and even the manners of his court, to which other circumstances contributed to give a peculiar and romantic character. It resembled probably (though its full splendor was of a later period) Grenada in its glory, more than any other in Europe, though more rich and picturesque from the variety of races, of manners, usages, even dresses, which prevailed within it."</p>
							<p>Gibbon also, <i>Decline and Fall</i>, Chap. lix., gives this graphic picture:—</p>
							<p>"Frederick the Second, the grandson of Barbarossa, was successively the pupil, the enemy, and the victim of the Church. At the age of twenty-one years, and in obedience to his guardian Innocent the Third, he assumed the cross; the same promise was repeated at his royal and imperial coronations; and his marriage with the heiress of Jerusalem forever bound him to defend the kingdom of his son Conrad. But as Frederick advanced in age and authority, he repented of the rash engagements of his youth: his liberal sense and knowledge taught him to despise the phantoms of superstition and the crowns of Asia: he no longer entertained the same reverence for the successors of Innocent; and his ambition was occupied by the restoration of the Italian monarchy, from Sicily to the Alps. But the success of this project would have reduced the Popes to their primitive simplicity; and, after the deInferno x. 261 lays and excuses of twelve years, they urged the Emperor, with entreaties and threats, to fix the time and place of his departure for Palestine. In the harbors of Sicily and Apulia he prepared a fleet of one hundred galleys, and of one hundred vessels, that were framed to transport and land two thousand five hundred knights, with horses and attendants; his vassals of Naples and Germany formed a powerful army; and the number of English crusaders was magnified to sixty thousand by the report of fame. But the inevitable, or affected, slowness of these mighty preparations consumed the strength and provisions of the more indigent pilgrims; the multitude was thinned by sickness and desertion, and the sultry summer of Calabria anticipated the mischiefs of a Syrian campaign. At length the Emperor hoisted sail at Brundusium with a fleet and army of forty thousand men; but he kept the sea no more than three days; and his hasty retreat, which was ascribed by his friends to a grievous indisposition, was accused by his enemies as a voluntary and obstinate disobedience. For suspending his vow was Frederick excommunicated by Gregory the Ninth; for presuming, the next year, to accomplish his vow, he was again excommunicated by the same Pope. While he served under the banner of the cross, a crusade was preached against him in Italy; and after his return he was compelled to ask pardon for the injuries which he had suffered. The clergy and military orders of Palestine were previously instructed to renounce his communion and dispute his commands; and in his own kingdom the Emperor was forced to consent that the orders of the camp should be issued in the name of God and of the Christian republic. Frederick entered Jerusalem in triumph; and with his own hands (for no priest would perform the office) he took the crown from the altar of the holy sepulchre."</p>
							<p>Matthew Paris, A. D. 1239, gives a long letter of Pope Gregory IX. in which he calls the Emperor some very hard names; "a beast, full of the words of blasphemy," "a wolf in sheep's clothing," "a son of lies," "a staff of the impious," and "hammer of the earth"; and finally accuses him of being the author of a work <i>De Tribus Jmpostoribus</i>, which, if it ever existed, is no longer to be found. "There is one thing," he says in conclusion, "at which, although we ought to mourn for a lost man, you ought to rejoice greatly, and for which you ought to return thanks to God, namely, that this man, who delights in being called a forerunner of Antichrist, by God's will, no longer endures to be veiled in darkness; not expecting that his trial and disgrace arc near, he with his own hands undermines the wall of his abominations, and, by the said letters of his, brings his works of darkness to the light, boldly setting forth in them, that he could not be excommunicated by us, although the Vicar of Christ; thus affirming that the Church had not the power of binding and loosing, which was given by our Lord to St. Peter and his successors But as it may not be easily believed by some people that he has ensnared himself by the words of his own mouth, proofs are ready, to the triumph of the faith; for this king of pestilence openly asserts that the whole world was deceived by three, namely Christ Jesus, Moses, and Mahomet; that, two of them having died in glory, the said Jesus was suspended on the cross; and he, moreover, presumes plainly to affirm (or rather to lie), that all are foolish who believe that God, who created nature, and could do all things, was born of the Virgin."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>120. This is Cardinal Ottaviano degli Ubaldini, who is accused of saying, "If there be any soul, I have lost mine for the Ghibellines." Dante takes him at his word.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-11">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>8. Some critics and commentators accuse Dante of confounding Pope Anastasius with the Emperor of that name. It is however highly probable that Dante knew best whom he meant. Both were accused of heresy, though the heresy of the Pope seems to have been of a mild type. A few years previous to his time, namely, in the year 484, Pope Felix III. and Acacius, Bishop of Constantinople, mutually excommunicated each other. When Anastasius II. became Pope in 496, "he dared," says Milman, <i>Hist. Lat. Christ.</i>, I. 349, "to doubt the damnation of a bishop excommunicated by the See of Rome: 'Felix and Acacius are now both before a higher tribunal; leave them to that unerring judgment.' He would have the name of Acacius passed over in silence, quietly dropped, rather than publicly expunged from the diptychs. This degenerate successor of St. Peter is not admitted to the rank of a saint. The Pontifical book (its authority on this point is indignantly repudiated) accuses Anastasius of having communicated with a deacon of Thessalonica, who had kept up communion with Acacius; and of having entertained secret designs of restoring the name of Acacius in the services of the Church."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>9. Photinus is the deacon of Thessalonica alluded to in the preceding note. His heresy was, that the Holy Ghost did not proceed from the Father, and that the Father was greater than the Son. The writers who endeavor to rescue the Pope at the expense of the Emperor say that Photinus died before the days of Pope Anastasius.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>50. Cahors is the cathedral town of the Department of the Lot, in the South of France, and the birthplace of the poet Clement Marot and of the romance-writer Calprenede. In the Middle Ages it seems to have been a nest of usurers. Matthew Paris, in his <i>Historia Major</i>, under date of 1235, has a chapter entitled. <i>Of the Usury of the Caursines</i>, which in the translation of Rev. J. A. Giles runs as follows:—</p>
							<p>"In these days prevailed the horrible nuisance of the Caursines to such a degree that there was hardly any one in all England, especially among the bishops, who was not caught in their net. Even the king himself was held indebted to them in an uncalculable sum of money. For they circumvented the needy in their necessities, cloaking their usury under the show of trade, and pretending not to know that whatever is added to the principal is usury, under whatever name it may be called. For it is manifest that their loans lie not in the path of charity, inasmuch as they do not hold out a helping hand to the poor to relieve them, but to deceive them; not to aid others in their starvation, but to gratify their own covetousness; seeing that the motive stamps our every deed."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>70. <em>Those within the fat lagoon</em>, the Irascible, Canto VII, VIII.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>71. <em>Whom the wind drives</em>, the Wanton, Canto v., <em>and whom the rain doth beat</em>, the Gluttonous, Canto VI.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>72. <em>And who encounter with such bitter tongues</em>, the Prodigal and Avaricious, Canto VII.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>80. The <i>Ethics</i> of Aristotle, VII. i, "After these things, making another beginning, it must be observed by us that there are three species of things which are to be avoided in manners, viz. Malice, Incontinence, and Bestiality."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>101. The <i>Physics</i> of Aristotle, Book II.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>107, Genesis, i. 28: "And God said unto them. Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>109. Gabrielle Rossetti, in the <i>Comento Analitico</i> of his edition of the <i>Divina Commedia</i>, quotes here the lines of Florian:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"Nous ne recevons Texistence</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Qu'afin de travailler pour nous, ou pour autrut:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>De ce devoir sacre quiconque se dispense</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Est puni par la Providence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Par le bcsoin, ou par I'ennui."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>110. The constellation Pisces precedes Aries, in which the sun now is. This indicates the time to be a little before sunrise. It is Saturday morning.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>114. The Wain is the constellation Charles's Wain, or Bootes; and Caurus is the Northwest, indicated by the Latin name of the northwest wind.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-12">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. With this Canto begins the Seventh Circle of the Inferno, in which the Violent are punished. In the first <i>Girone</i> or round are the Violent against their neighbors, plunged more or less deeply in the river of boiling blood.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>2. Mr. Ruskin, <i>Modern Painters</i>, III. 242, has the following remarks upon Dante's idea of rocks and mountains:—</p>
							<p>"At the top of the abyss of the seventh circle, appointed for the 'violent,' or souls who had done evil by force, we are told, first, that the edge of it was composed of 'great broken stones in a circle'; then, that the place was 'Alpine'; and, becoming hereupon attentive, in order to hear what an Alpine place is like, we find that it was 'like the place beyond Trent, where the rock, either by earthquake, or failure of support, has broken down to the plain, so that it gives any one at the top some means of getting down to the bottom.' This is not a very elevated or enthusiastic description of an Alpine scene; and it is far from mended by the following verses, in which we are told that Dante 'began to go down by this great unloading of stones,' and that they moved often under his feet by reason of the new weight. The fact is that Dante, by many expressions throughout the poem, shows himself to have been a notably bad climber; and being fond of sitting in the sun, looking at his fair Baptistery, or walking in a dignified manner on flat pavement in a long robe, it puts him seriously out of his way when he has to take to his hands and knees, or look to his feet; so that the first strong impression made upon him by any Alpine scene whatever is, clearly, that it is bad walking. When he is in a fright and hurry, and has a very steep place to go down, Virgil has to carry him altogether."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>5. Speaking of the region to which Dante here alludes, Eustace, <i>Classical Tour</i>, I. 71, says:—</p>
							<p>"The descent becomes more rapid between Roveredo and Ala; the river, which glided gently through the valley of Trent, assumes the roughness of a torrent; the defiles become narrower; and the mountains break into rocks and precipices, which occasionally approach the road, sometimes rise perpendicular from it, and now and then hang over it in terrible majesty."</p>
							<p>In a note he adds:—</p>
							<p>"Amid these wilds the traveller cannot fail to notice a vast tract called the <i>Slavini di Marco</i>, covered with fragments of rock torn from the sides of the neighboring mountains by an earthquake, or perhaps by their own unsupported weight, and hurled down into the plains below. They spread over the whole valley, and in some places contract the road to a very narrow space. A few firs and cypresses scattered in the intervals, or sometimes rising out of the crevices of the rocks, cast a partial and melancholy shade amid the surrounding nakedness and desolation. This scene of ruin seems to have made a deep impression upon the wild imagination of Dante, as he has introduced it into the twelfth canto of the Inferno, in order to give the reader an adequate idea of one of his infernal ramparts."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>12. The Minotaur, half bull, half man. See the infamous story in all the classical dictionaries.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>18. The Duke of Athens is Theseus. Chaucer gives him the same title in <i>The Knightes Tale</i>:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"Whilom, as olde stories tellen us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ther was a duk that highte Theseus.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of Athenes he was lord and governour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That greter was ther non under the sonne.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ful many a rich contree had he wonne.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What with his wisdom and his chevalrie,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He conquerd all the regne of Feminie,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That whilom was ycleped Scythia;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wedded the freshe quene Ipolita,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And brought hire home with him to his contree</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With mochel glorie and great solempnitee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And eke hire yonge suster Emelie.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thus with victorie and with melodic</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let I this worthy duk to Athenes ride,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all his host, in armes him beside."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>Shakespeare also, in the <i>Midsummer Night's Dream</i>, calls him the Duke of Athens.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>20. Ariadne, who gave Theseus the silken thread to guide him back through the Cretan labyrinth after slaying the Minotaur. Hawthorne has beautifully told the old story in his <i>Tanglewood Tales</i>. "Ah, the bull-headed villain!" he says. "And O my good little people, you will perhaps see, one of these days, as I do now, that every human being who suffers anything evil to get into his nature, or to remain there, is a kind of Minotaur, an enemy of his fellow-creatures, and separated from all good companionship, as this poor monster was."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>39. Christ's descent into Limbo, and the earthquake at the Crucifixion.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>42. This is the doctrine of Empedocles and other old philosophers. See Ritter, <i>History of Ancient Philosophy</i>, Book V. Chap. vi. The following passages are from Mr. Morrison's translation:—</p>
							<p>"Empedocles proceeded from the Eleatic principle of the oneness of all truth. In its unity it resembles a ball; he calls it the sphere, wherein the ancients recognized the God of Empedoocles...</p>
							<p>"Into the unity of the sphere all elementary things are combined by love, without difference or distinction: within it they lead a happy life, replete with holiness, and remote from discord:</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>They know no god of war nor the spirit of battles.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor Zeus, the sovereign, nor Cronos, nor yet Poseidon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But Cypris the queen...</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>"The actual separation of the elements one from another is produced by discord; for originally they were bound together in the sphere, and therein continued perfectly unmovable. Now in this Empedocles posits different periods and different conditions of the world; for, according to the above position, originally all is united in love, and then subsequently the elements and living essences are separated...</p>
							<p>"His assertion of certain mundane periods was taken by the ancients literally; for they tell us that, according to his theory. All was originally one by love, but afterwards many and at enmity with itself through discord."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>56. The Centaurs are set to guard this Circle, as symbolizing violence, with some form of which the classic poets usually associate them.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>68. Chaucer, <i>The Monkes Tale</i>:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"A lemman had this noble champion,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That highte Deianire, as fresh as May;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And as thise clerkes maken mention,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She hath him sent a sherte fresh and gay:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alas! this sherte, alas and wala wa!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Envenimed was sotilly withalle.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That or that he had wered it half a day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It made his flesh all from his bones falle."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>Chiron was a son of Saturn; Pholus, of Silenus; and Nessus, of Ixion and the Cloud.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>71. Homer, <i>Iliad</i>, XI. 832, "Whom Chiron instructed, the most just of the Centaurs." Hawthorne gives a humorous turn to the fable of Chiron, in the <i>Tanglewood Tales</i>, p. 273:—</p>
							<p>"I have sometimes suspected that Master Chiron was not really very different from other people, but that, being a kind-hearted and merry old fellow, he was in the habit of making believe that he was a horse, and scrambling about the school-room on all fours, and letting the little boys ride upon his back. And so, when his scholars had grown up, and grown old, and were trotting their grandchildren on their knees, they told them about the sports of their school days; and these young folks took the idea that their grandfathers had been taught their letters by a Centaur, half man and half horse...</p>
							<p>"Be that as it may, it has always been told for a fact, (and always will be told, as long as the world lasts,) that Chiron, with the head of a schoolmaster, had the body and legs of a horse. Just imagine the grave old gentleman clattering and stamping into the schoolroom on his four hoofs, perhaps treading on some little fellow's toes, flourishing his switch tail instead of a rod, and, now and then, trotting out of doors to eat a mouthful of grass!"</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>77. Mr. Ruskin refers to this line in confirmation of his theory that "all great art represents something that it sees or believes in; nothing unseen or uncredited." The passage is as follows. <i>Modern Painters</i>, IK. 83:—</p>
							<p>"And just because it is always something that it sees or believes in, there is the peculiar character above noted, almost unmistakable, in all high and true ideals, of having been as it were studied from the life, and involving pieces of sudden familiarity, and close <em>specific</em> painting which never would have been admitted or even thought of, had not the painter drawn either from the bodily life or from the life of faith. For instance, Dante's Centaur, Chiron, dividing his beard with his arrow before he can speak, is a thing that no mortal would ever have thought of, if he had not actually seen the Centaur do it. They might have composed handsome bodies of men and horses in all possible ways, through a whole life of pseudo-idealism, and yet never dreamed of any such thing. But the real living Centaur actually trotted across Dante's brain, and he saw him do it."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>107. Alexander of Thessaly and Dionysius of Syracuse.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>110. Azzolino, or Ezzolino di Romano, tyrant of Padua, nicknamed the Son of the Devil. Ariosto, <i>Orlando Furioso</i>, III. 33, describes him as</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"Fierce Ezelin, that most inhuman lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who shall be deemed by men a child of hell."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>His Story may be found in Sismondi's <i>Histoire des Republiques Italiennes</i>, Chap. XIX. He so outraged the religious sense of the people by his cruelties, that a crusade was preached against him, and he died a prisoner in 1259, tearing the bandages from his wounds, and fierce and defiant to the last.</p>
							<p>"Ezzolino was small of stature," says Sismondi, "but the whole aspect of his person, all his movements, indicated the soldier. His language was bitter, his countenance proud; and by a single look, he made the boldest tremble. His soul, so greedy of all crimes, felt no attraction for sensual pleasures. Never had Ezzolino loved women; and this perhaps is the reason why in his punishments he was as pitiless against them as against men. He was in his sixty-sixth year when he died; and his reign of blood had lasted thirty-four years."</p>
							<p>Many glimpses of him are given in the <i>Cento Novelie Antiche</i>, as if his memory long haunted the minds of men. Here are two of them, from Novella 83.</p>
							<p>"Once upon a time Messer Azzolino da Romano made proclamation, through his own territories and elsewhere, that he wished to do a great charity, and therefore that all the beggars, both men and women, should assemble in his meadow, on a certain day, and to each he would give a new gown, and abundance of food. The news spread among the servants on all hands. When the day of assembling came, his seneschals went among them with the gowns and the food, and made them strip naked one by one, and then clothed them with new clothes, and fed them. They asked for their old rags, but it was all in vain; for he put them into a heap and set fire to them. Afterwards he found there so much gold and silver melted, that it more than paid the expense, and then he dismissed them with his blessing...</p>
							<p>"To tell you how much he was feared, would be a long story, and many people know it. But I will recall how he, being one day with the Emperor on horseback, with all their people, they laid a wager as to which of them had the most beautiful sword. The Emperor drew from its sheath his own, which was wonderfully garnished with gold and precious stones. Then said Messer Azzolino: 'It is very beautiful; but mine, without any great ornament, is far more beautiful';—and he drew it forth. Then six hundred knights, who were with him, all drew theirs. When the Emperor beheld this cloud of swords, he said: 'Yours is the most beautiful.'"</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>111. Obizzo da Esti, Marquis of Ferrara. He was murdered by Azzo, "whom he thought to be his son," says Boccaccio, "though he was not." The <i>Ottimo Comento</i> remarks: "Many call themselves sons, and are step-sons."</p>
							<p>119. Guido di Monforte, who murdered Prince Henry of England "in the bosom of God," that is, in the church, at Viterbo. The event is thus narrated by Napier, <i>Florentine History</i>, I. 283:—</p>
							<p>"Another instance of this revengeful spirit occurred in the year 1271 at Viterbo, where the cardinals had assembled to elect a successor to Clement the Fourth, about whom they had been long disputing: Charles of Anjou and Philip of France, with Edward and Henry, sons of Richard, Duke of Cornwall, had repaired there, the two first to hasten the election, which they finally accomplished by the elevation of Gregory the Tenth. During these proceedings Prince Henry, while taking the sacrament in the church of San Silvestro at Viterbo, was stabbed to the heart by his own cousin, Guy de Montfort, in revenge for the Earl of Leicester's death, although Henry was then endeavoring to procure his pardon. This sacrilegious act threw Viterbo into confusion, but Montfort had many supporters, one of whom asked him what he had done. '<em>I have taken my revenge,</em>' said he. '<em>But your father's body was trailed!</em>' At this reproach, De Montfort instantly re-entered the church, walked straight to the altar, and, seizing Henry's body by the hair, dragged it through the aisle, and left it, still bleeding, in the open street: he then retired unmolested to the castle of his father-in-law. Count Rosso of the Maremma, and there remained in security!"</p>
							<p>"The body of the Prince," says Barlow, <i>Study of Dante</i>, p. 125, "was brought to England, and interred at Hayles, in Gloucestershire, in the Abbey which his father had there built for monks of the Cistercian order; but his heart was put into a golden vase, and placed on the tomb of Edward the Confessor, in Westminster Abbey; most probably, as stated by some writers, in the hands of a statue."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>123. Violence in all its forms was common enough in Florence in the age of Dante.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>134. Attila, the Scourge of God. Gibbon, <i>Decline and Fall</i>, Chap. 39, describes him thus:—</p>
							<p>"Attila, the son of Mundzuk, deduced his noble, perhaps his regal, descent from the ancient Huns, who had formerly contended with the monarchs of China. His features, according to the observation of a Gothic historian, bore the stamp of his national origin; and the portrait of Attila exhibits the genuine deformity of a modern Calmuk; a large head, a swarthy complexion, small, deep-seated eyes, a flat nose, a few hairs in the place of a beard, broad shoulders, and a short, square body, of nervous strength, though of a disproportioned form. The haughty step and demeanor of the King of the Huns expressed the consciousness of his superiority above the rest of mankind; and he had a custom of fiercely rolling his eyes, as if he wished to enjoy the terror which he inspired."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>135. Which Pyrrhus and which Sextus, the commentators cannot determine; but incline to Pyrrhus of Epirus, and Sextus Pompey, the corsair of the Mediterranean.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>137. Nothing more is known of these highwaymen than that the first infested the Roman sea-shore, and that the second was of a noble family of Florence.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-13">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. In this Canto is described the punishment of those who had laid violent hands on themselves or their property.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>2. Chaucer, <i>Knightes Tale</i>, 1977:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"First on the wall was peinted a forest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In which therwonneth neyther man ne best,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With knotty knarry barrein trees old</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of stubbes sharpe and hidous to behold;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In which there ran a romble and a swough</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As though a storme shuld bresten every bough."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>9. The Cecina is a small river running into the Mediterranean not many miles south of Leghorn; Corneto, a village in the Papal States, north of Civita Vecchia. The country is wild and thinly peopled, and studded with thickets, the haunts of the deer and the wild boar. This region is the fatal Maremma, thus described by Forsyth, <i>Italy</i>, p. 156:—</p>
							<p>"Farther south is the Maremma, a region which, though now worse than a desert, is supposed to have been anciently both fertile and healthy. The Maremma certainly formed part of that Etruria which was called from its harvests the <i>annonaria</i>. Old Roman cisterns may still be traced, and the ruins of Populonium are still visible in the worst part of this tract: yet both nature and man seem to have conspired against it.</p>
							<p>"Sylla threw this maritime part of Tuscany into enormous <i>latifundia</i> for his disbanded soldiers. Similar distributions continued to lessen its population during the Empire. In the younger Pliny's time the climate was pestilential. The Lombards gave it a new aspect of misery. Wherever they found culture they built castles, and to each castle they allotted a 'bandita' or military fief. Hence baronial wars which have left so many picturesque ruins on the hills, and such desolation round them. Whenever a baron was conquered, his vassals escaped to the cities, and the vacant fief was annexed to the victorious. Thus stripped of men, the lands returned into a state of nature: some were flooded by the rivers, others grew into horrible forests, which enclose and concentrate the pestilence ofthe lakes and marshes.</p>
							<p>"In some parts the water is brackish, and lies lower than the sea: in others it oozes full of tartar from beds of travertine. At the bottom or on the sides of hills are a multitude of hot springs, which form pools, called <i>Lagoni</i>. A few of these are said to produce borax: some, which are called <i>fumache</i>, exhale sulphur; others, called <i>bulicami</i>, boil with a mephitic gas. The very air above is only a pool of vapors, which sometimes undulate, but seldom flow off. It draws corruption from a rank, unshorn, rotting vegetation, from reptiles and fish both living and dead.</p>
							<p>"All nature conspires to drive man away from this fatal region; but man will ever return to his bane, if it be well baited. The Casentine peasants still migrate hither in the winter to feed their cattle: and here they sow corn, make charcoal, saw wood, cut hoops, and peel cork. When summer returns they decamp, but often too late; for many leave their corpses on the road, or bring home the Maremmian disease."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>11. <i>Aeneid</i>, III., Davidson's Tr.:—</p>
							<p>"The shores of the Strophades first receive me rescued from the waves. The Strophades, so called by a Greek name, are islands situated in the great Ionian Sea; which direful Cel^no and the other Harpies inhabit, from what time Phineus' palace was closed against them, and they were frighted from his table, which they formerly haunted. No monster more fell than they, no plague and scourge of the gods more cruel, ever issued from the Stygian waves. They are fowls with virgin faces, most loathsome is their bodily discharge, hands hooked, and looks ever pale with famine. Hither conveyed, as soon as we entered the port, lo! we observe joyous herds of cattle roving up and down the plains, and flocks of goats along the meadows without a keeper. We rush upon them with our swords, and invoke the gods and Jove himself to share the booty. Then along the winding shore we raise the couches, and feast on the rich repast. But suddenly, with direful swoop, the Harpies are upon us from the mountains, shake their wings with loud din, prey upon our banquet, and defile everything with their touch: at the same time, together with a rank smell, hideous screams arise."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>21. His words in the <i>Aeneid</i>, III., Davidson's Tr.:—</p>
							<p>"Near at hand there chanced to be a rising ground, on v/hose top were young cornel-trees, and a myrtle rough with thick, spear-like branches. I came up to it, and attempting to tear from the earth the verdant wood, that I might cover the altars with the leafy boughs, I observe a dreadful prodigy, and wondrous to relate. For from that tree which first is torn from the soil, its rooted fibres being burst asunder, drops of black blood distil, and stain the ground with gore: cold terror shakes my limbs, and my chill blood is congealed with fear. I again essay to tear off a limber bough from another, and thoroughly explore the latent cause: and from the rind of that other the purple blood descends. Raising in my mind many an anxious thought, I with reverence besought the rural nymphs, and father Mars, who presides over the Thracian territories, kindly to prosper the vision and avert evil from the omen. But when I at tempted the boughs a third time with a more vigorous effort, and on my knees struggled against the opposing mould, (shall I speak, or shall I forbear?) a piteous groan is heard from the bottom of the rising ground, and a voice sent forth reaches my ears: 'Aeneas, why dost thou tear an unhappy wretch? Spare me, now that I am in my grave; forbear to pollute with guilt thy pious hands: Troy brought me forth no stranger to you; nor is it from the trunk this blood distils.'"</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>40. Chaucer, <i>Knightes Tale</i>, 2339:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"And as it queinte, it made a whisteling</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As don these brondes wet in hir brenning,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And at the brondes ende outran anon</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As it were blody dropes many on."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>See also Spenser, <i>Faerie Queene</i>, I. ii. 30.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>58. Pietro della Vigna, Chancellor of the Emperor Frederick II. Napier's account of him is as follows, <i>Florentine History</i>, I. 197:—</p>
							<p>"The fate of his friend and minister, Piero delle Vigne of Capua, if truly told, would nevertheless impress us with an unfavorable idea of his mercy and magnanimity: Piero was sent with Taddeo di Sessa as Frederick's advocate and representative to the Council of Lyons, which was assembled by his friend Innocent the Fourth, nominally to reform the Church, but really to impart more force and solemnity to a fresh sentence of excommunication and deposition. There Taddeo spoke with force and boldness for his master; but Piero was silent; and hence he was accused of being, like several others, bribed by the Pope, not only to desert the Emperor, but to attempt his life; and whether he were really culpable, or the victim of court intrigue, is still doubtful. Frederick, on apparently good evidence, condemned him to have his eyes burned out, and the sentence was executed at San Miniato al Tedesco: being afterwards sent on horseback to Pisa, where he was hated, as an object for popular derison, he died, as is conjectured, from the effects of a fall while thus cruelly exposed, and not by his own hand, as Dante believed and sung,"</p>
							<p>Milman, <i>Latin Christianity</i>, V. 499, gives the story thus:—</p>
							<p>"Peter de Vinea had been raised by the wise choice of Frederick to the highest rank and influence. All the acts of Frederick were attributed to his Chancellor. De Vinca, like his master, was a poet; he was one of the counsellors in his great scheme of legislation. Some rumors spread abroad that at the Council of Lyons, though Frederick had forbidden all his representatives from holding private intercourse with the Pope, De Vinea had many secret conferences with Innocent, and was accused of betraying his master's interests. Yet there was no seeming diminution in the trust placed in De Vinea. Still, to the end the Emperor's letters concerning the disaster at Parma are by the same hand. Over the cause of his disgrace and death, even in his own day, there was deep doubt and obscurity. The popular rumor ran that Frederick was ill; the physician of De Vinea prescribed for him; the Emperor having received some warning, addressed De Vinea: 'My friend, in thee I have full trust; art thou sure that this is medicine, not poison?' De Vinea replied: 'How often has my physician ministered healthful medicines!—why are you now afraid?' Frederick took the cup, sternly commanded the physician to drink half of it. The physician threw himself at the King's feet, and, as he fell, overthrew the liquor. But what was left was administered to some criminals, who died in agony. The Emperor wrung his hands and wept bitterly: 'Whom can I now trust, betrayed by my own familiar friend? Never can I know security, never can I know joy more.' By one account Peter de Vinea was led ignominiously on an ass through Pisa, and thrown into prison, where he dashed his brains out against the wall. Dante's immortal verse has saved the fame of De Vinea: according to the poet he was the victim of wicked and calumnious jealousy."</p>
							<p>See also Giuseppe de Blasiis, <i>Vita et Opere di Pietro della Vigna</i>.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>112. <i>Iliad</i>, XII. 146: "Like two wild boars, which catch the coming tumult of men and dogs in the mountains, and, advancing obliquely to the attack, break down the wood about them, cutting it off at the roots."</p>
							<p>Chaucer, <i>Legende of Goode Women</i>:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"Envie ys lavendere of the court alway;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For she ne parteth neither nyght ne day</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Out of the house of Cesar, thus saith Daunte."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>120. "Lano," says Boccaccio, <i>Comento</i>, "was a young gentleman of Siena, who had a large patrimony, and associating himself with a club of other young Sienese, called the Spendthrift Club, they also being all rich, together with them, not spending but squandering, in a short time he consumed all that he had and became very poor." Joining some Florentine troops sent out against the Aretines, he was in a skirmish at the parish of Toppo, which Dante calls a joust; "and notwithstanding he might have saved himself," continues Boccaccio, "remembering his wretched condition, and it seeming to him a grievous thing to bear poverty, as he had been very rich, he rushed into the thick of the enemy and was slain, as perhaps he desired to be."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>125. Some commentators interpret these dogs as poverty and despair, still pursuing their victims. The <i>Ottimo Comento</i> calls them "poor men who, to follow pleasure and the kitchens of other people, abandoned their homes and families, and are therefore transformed into hunting dogs, and pursue and devour their masters."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>133. Jacopo da St. Andrea was a Paduan of like character and life as Lano. "Among his other squanderings," says the <i>Ottimo Comento</i>, "it is said that, wishing to see a grand and beautiful fire, he had one of his own villas burned."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>143. Florence was first under the protection of the god Mars; afterwards under that of St. John the Baptist. But in Dante's time the statue of Mars was still standing on a column at the head of the Ponte Vecchio. It was overthrown by an inundation of the Arno in 1333. See Canto XV. Note 62.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>149. Florence was destroyed by Totila in 450, and never by Attila. In Dante's time the two seem to have been pretty generally confounded. The <i>Ottimo Comento</i> remarks upon this point, "Some say that Totila was one person and Attila another; and some say that he was one and the same man."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>150. Dante does not mention the name of this suicide; Boccaccio thinks, for one of two reasons; "either out of regard to his surviving relatives, who pcradventure are honorable men, and therefore he did not wish to stain them with the infamy of so dishonest a death, or else (as in those times, as if by a malediction sent by God upon our city, many hanged themselves) that each one might apply it to either he pleased of these many."</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-14">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. In this third round of the seventh circle are punished the Violent against God,</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"In heart denying and blaspheming him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And by disdaining Nature and her bounty."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>15. When he retreated across the Libyan desert with the remnant of Pompey's army after the battle of Pharsalia. Lucan, <i>Pharsalia</i>, Book IX.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"Foremost, behold, I lead you to the toil,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My feet shall foremost print the dusty soil."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>31. Boccaccio confesses that he does not know where Dante found this tradition of Alexander. Benvenuto da Imola says it is in a letter which Alex' ander wrote to Aristotle. He quotes the passage as follows: "In India ignited vapors fell from heaven like snow. I commanded my soldiers to trample them under foot."</p>
							<p>Dante perhaps took the incident from the old metrical <i>Romance of Alexander</i>, which in some form or other was current in his time. In the English version of it, published by the Roxburghe Club, we find the rain of fire, and a fall of snow; but it is the snow, and not the fire, that the soldiers trample down. So likewise in the French version. The English runs as follows, line 4164:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"Than fandis he furth as I finde five and twenti days,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come to a velanus vale thare was a vile cheele,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Quare flaggis of the fell snawe fell fra tiie heven,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That was a brade, sais the buke, as battcs ere of wolle.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than bett he many brigt fire and lest it bin nold,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And made his folk with thaire fcete as florcs it to trede.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than fell ther fra the firmament as it ware fell sparkes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ropand doune o rede fire, than any rayne thikir."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>45. Canto VIII. 83.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>56. Mount Etna, under which, with his Cyclops, Vulcan forged the thunderbolts of Jove.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>63. Capaneus was one of the seven kings who besieged Thebes. Euripides, <i>Phoenissae</i>, line 1188, thus describes his death:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"While o'er the battlements sprung Capaneus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Jove struck him with his thunder, and the earth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Resounded with the crack; meanwhile mankind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stood all aghast; from off the ladder's height</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His limbs were far asunder hurled, his hair</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Flew to'ards Olympus, to the ground his blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His hands and feet whirled like Ixion's wheel,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to the earth his flaming body fell."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>Also Gower, <i>Confes. Amant.</i>, I.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"As he the cite wolde assaile,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>God toke him selfe the bataile</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ayen his pride, and fro the sky</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A firy thonder sudeinly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He sende and him to pouder smote."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>72. Like Hawthorne's scarlet letter, at once an ornament and a punishment.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>79. The Bulicame or Hot Springs of Viterbo. Villani, <i>Cronica</i>, Book I. Ch. 51, gives the following brief account of these springs, and of the origin of the name of Viterbo:—</p>
							<p>"The city of Viterbo was built by the Romans, and in old times was called Vigezia, and the citizens Vigentians. And the Romans sent the sick there on account of the baths which flow from the Bulicame, and therefore it was called <i>Vita Erbo</i>, that is, life of the sick, or city of life."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>80. "The building thus appropriated," says Mr. Barlow, <i>Contributions to the Study of the Divine Comedy</i>, p. 129, "would appear to have been the large ruined edifice known as the Bagno di Ser Paolo Benigno, situated between the Bulicame and Viterbo. About half a mile beyond the Porta di Faule, which leads to Toscanella, we come to a way called Riello, after which we arrive at the said ruined edifice, which received the water from the Bulicame by conduits, and has popularly been regarded as the Bagno delle Meretrici alluded to by Dante; there is no other building here found, which can dispute with it the claim to this distinction."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>102. The shouts and cymbals of the Corybantes, drowning the cries of the infant Jove, lest Saturn should find him and devour him.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>103. The statue of Time, turning its back upon the East and looking towards Rome, Compare Daniel ii. 31.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>105. The Agee of Gold, Silver, Brass, and Iron. See Ovid, <i>Metamorph.</i> I.</p>
							<p>See also Don Quixote's discourse to the goatherds, inspired by the acorns they gave him. Book II. Chap. 3; and Tasso's Ode to the Golden Age, in the <i>Aminta</i>.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>113. The Tears of Time, forming the infernal rivers that flow into Cocytus.</p>
							<p>Milton, <i>Parad. Lost</i>, II. 577:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"Abhorred Styx, the flood of deadly hate;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sad Acheron of sorrow, black and deep;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cocytus, named of lamentation loud</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Heard on the rueful stream; fierce Phlegeton,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose waves of torrent fire inflame with rage.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Far off from these a slow and silent stream,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lethe, the river of oblivion, rolls</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her watery labyrinth, whereof who drinks</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forthwith his former state and being forgets,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forgets both joy and grief, pleasure and pain."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>136. See <i>Purgatorio</i> XXVIII.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-15">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. In this Canto is described the punishment of the Violent against Nature;—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"And for this reason does the smallest round</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seal with its signet Sodom and Cahors."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>4. Guizzante is not Ghent, but Cadsand, an island opposite L'Ecluse, where the great canal of Bruges enters the sea. A canal thus flowing into the sea, the dikes on either margin uniting with the sea-dikes, gives a perfect image of this part of the Inferno.</p>
							<p>Lodovico Guicciardini in his <i>Descrittione di tutti i Paesi Bassi</i> (1581), p. 416, speaking of Cadsand, says: "This is the very place of which our great poet Dante makes mention in the fifteenth chapter of the Inferno, calling it incorrectly, perhaps by error of the press, Guizzante; where still at the present day great repairs are continually made upon the dikes, because here, and in the environs towards Bruges, the flood, or I should rather say the tide, on account of the situation and lowness of the land, has very great power, particularly during a northwest wind."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>5. These lines recall Goldsmith's description in the <i>Traveller</i>:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"Methinks her patient sons before me stand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where the broad ocean leans against the land,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, sedulous to stop the coming tide,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lift the tall rampire's artificial pride.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Onward, methinks, and diligently slow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The firm connected bulwark seems to grow;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Spreads its long arms amidst the watery roar.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Scoops out an empire and usurps the shore."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>9. That part of the Alps in which the Brenta rises.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>29. The reading <i>la mia</i> seems preferable to <i>la mano</i>, and is justified by line 45.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>30. Brunetto Latini, Dante's friend and teacher. Villani thus speaks of him, <i>Cronica</i>, VIII. 10: "In this year I 294 died in Florence a worthy citizen, whose name was Ser Brunetto Latini, who was a great philosopher and perfect master of rhetoric, both in speaking and in writing. He commented the Rhetoric of Tully, and made the good and useful book called the <i>Tesoro</i>, and the <i>Tesoretto</i>, and the <i>Keys of the Tesoro</i>, and many other books of philosophy, and of vices and of virtues, and he was Secretary of our Commune, He was a worldly man, but we have made mention of him because he was the first master in refining the Florentines, and in teaching them how to speak correctly, and how to guide and govern our Republic on political principles."</p>
							<p>Boccaccio, <i>Comento</i>, speaks of him thus: "This Ser Brunetto Latini was a Florentine, and a very able man in some of the liberal arts, and in philosophy; but his principal calling was that of Notary; and he held himself and his calling in such great esteem, that, having made a mistake in a contract drawn up by him, and having been in consequence accused of fraud, he preferred to be condemned for it rather than to confess that he had made a mistake; and afterwards he quitted Florence in disdain, and leaving in memory of himself a book composed by him, called the <i>Tesoretto</i>, he went to Paris and lived there a long time, and composed a book there which is in French, and in which he treats of many matters regarding the liberal arts, and moral and natural philosophy, and metaphysics, which he called the <i>Tesoro</i>; and finally, I believe, he died in Paris."</p>
							<p>He also wrote a short poem, called the <i>Favoletto</i>, and perhaps the <i>Pataffio</i>, a satirical poem in the Florentine dialect, "a jargon," says Nardini, "which cannot be understood even with a commentary." But his fame rests upon the <i>Tesoretto</i> and the <i>Tesoro</i>, and more than all upon the fact that he was Dante's teacher, and was put by him into a very disreputable place in the Inferno. He died in Florence, not in Paris, as Boccaccio supposes, and was buried in Santa Maria Novella, where his tomb still exists. It is strange that Boccaccio should not have known this, as it was in this church that the "seven young gentlewomen" of his Decameron met "on a Tuesday morning," and resolved to go together into the country, where they "might hear the birds sing, and see the verdure of the hills and plains, and the fields full of grain undulating like the sea."</p>
							<p>The poem of the <i>Tesoretto</i>, written in a jingling metre, which reminds one of the <i>Vision of Piers Ploughman</i>, is itself a Vision, with the customary allegorical personages of the Virtues and Vices. Ser Brunetto, returning from an embassy to King Alphonso of Spain, meets on the plain of Roncesvalles a student of Bologna, riding on a bay mule, who informs him that the Guelfs have been banished from Florence. Whereupon Ser Brunetto, plunged in meditation and sorrow, loses the highroad and wanders in a wondrous forest. Here he discovers the august and gigantic figure of Nature, who relates to him the creation of the world, and gives him a banner to protect him on his pilgrimage through the forest, in which he meets with no adventures, but with the Virtues and Vices, Philosophy, Fortune, Ovid, and the God of Love, and sundry other characters, which are sung at large through eight or ten chapters. He then emerges from the forest, and confesses himself to the monks of Montpellier; after which he goes back into the forest again, and suddenly finds himself on the summit of Olympus; and the poem abruptly leaves him discoursing about the elements with Ptolemy,</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"Mastro di storlomia</span>
									<br/>
									<span>E di filosofia."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>It has been supposed by some commentators that Dante was indebted to the <i>Tesoretto</i> for the first idea of the <i>Commedia</i>. "If any one is pleased to imagine this," says the Abbate Zannoni in the Preface to his edition of the <i>Tesoretto</i>, (Florence, 1824,) "he must confess that a slight and almost invisible spark served to kindle a vast conflagration."</p>
							<p>The <i>Tesoro</i>, which is written in French, is a much more ponderous and pretentious volume. Hitherto it has been known only in manuscript, or in the Italian translation of Giamboni, but at length appears as one of the volumes of the <i>Collection de Documents Inedits sur l' Histoire de France</i>, under the title of <i>Li Livres dou Tresor</i>, edited by P. Chabaille, Paris, 1863; a stately quarto ol some seven hundred pages, which it would assuage the fiery torment of Ser Brunetto to look upon, and justify him in saying</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"Commended unto thee be my Tesoro,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In which I still live, and no more I ask."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>The work is quaint and curious, but mainly interesting as being written by Dante's schoolmaster, and showing what he knew and what he taught his pupil. I cannot better describe it than in the author's own words. Book I. ch. i:—</p>
							<p>"The smallest part of this Treasure is like unto ready money, to be expended daily in things needful; that is, it treats of the beginning of time, of the antiquity of old histories, of the creation of the world, and in fine of the nature of all things...</p>
							<p>"The second part, which treats of the vices and virtues, is of precious stones, which give unto man delight and virtue; that is to say, what things a man should do, and what he should not, and shows the reason why...</p>
							<p>"The third part of the Treasure is of fine gold; that is to say, it teaches a man to speak according to the rules of rhetoric, and how a ruler ought to govern those beneath him...</p>
							<p>"And I say not that this book is extracted from my own poor sense and my own naked knowledge, but, on the contrary, it is like a honeycomb gathered from diverse flowers; for this book is wholly compiled from the wonderful sayings of the authors who before our time have treated of philosophy, each one according to his knowledge....</p>
							<p>"And if any one should ask why this book is written in Romance, according to the language of the French, since we are Italian, I should say it is for two reasons; one, because we are in France, and the other, because this speech is more delectable, and more common to all people."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>62. "Afterwards," says Brunetto Latini, <i>Tresor</i>, Book I. Pt. I. ch. 37, "the Romans besieged Fiesole, till at last they conquered it and brought it into subjection. Then they built upon the plain, which is at the foot of the high rocks on which that city stood, another city, that is now called Florence. And know that the spot of ground where Florence stands was formerly called the House of Mars, that is to say the House of War; for Mars, who is one of the seven planets, is called the God of War, and as such was worshipped of old. Therefore it is no wonder that the Florentines are always in war and in discord, for that planet reigns over them. Of this Master Brunez Latins ought to know the truth, for he was born there, and was in exile on account of war with the Florentines, when he composed this book."</p>
							<p>See also Villani, I. 38, who assigns a different reason for the Florentine dissensions. "And observe, that if the Florentines are always in war and dissension among themselves it is not to be wondered at, they being descended from two nations so contrary and hostile and different in customs, as were the noble and virtuous Romans and the rude and warlike Fiesolans."</p>
							<p>Again, IV. 7, he attributes the Florentine dissensions to both the abovementioned causes.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>67. Villani, IV. 31, tells the story of certain columns of porphyry given by the Pisans to the Florentines for guarding their city while the Pisan army had gone to the conquest of Majorca. The columns were cracked by fire, but being covered with crimson cloth, the Florentines did not perceive it. Boccaccio repeats the story with variations, but does not think it a sufficient reason for calling the Florentines blind, and confesses that he does not know what reason there can be for so calling them.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>89. The "other text" is the prediction of his banishment. Canto X. 81, and the Lady is Beatrice.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>96. Boileau, <i>Epitre</i>, V.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"Qu'a son gre de'sormais la fortune me joue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On me verra dormir au branle de sa roue."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>And Tennyson's Song of "Fortune and her Wheel":—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>"Turn, Fortune, turn thy wheel and lower the proud;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Turn thy wild wheel thro' sunshine, storm, and cloud;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy wheel and thee we neither love nor hate.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>"Turn, Fortune, turn thy wheel with smile or frown;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With that wild wheel we go not up or down;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our hoard is little, but our hearts are great.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>"Smile and we smile, the lords of many lands;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Frown and we smile, the lords of our own hands;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For man is man and master of his fate.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>"Turn, turn thy wheel above the staring crowd;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy wheel and thou are shadows in the cloud;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy wheel and thee we neither love nor hate."</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>109. Priscian, the grammarian of Constantinople in the sixth century.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>110. Francesco d'Accorso, a distinguished jurist and Professor at Bologna in the thirteenth century, celebrated for his Commentary upon the Code Justinian.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>113. Andrea de' Mozzi, Bishop of Florence, transferred by the Pope, the "Servant of Servants," to Vicenza; the two cities being here designated by the rivers on which they are respectively situated.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>119. See Note 30.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>122. The <i>Corsa del Pallio</i>, or foot races, at Verona; in which a green mantle, or <i>Pallio</i>, was the prize. Buttura says that these foot-races are still continued (1823), and that he has seen them more than once; but certainly not in the nude state in which Boccaccio describes them, and which renders Dante's comparison more complete and striking.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-16">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. In this Canto the subject of the preceding is continued.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>4. Guidoguerra, Tegghiajo Aldobrandi, and Jacopo Rusticucci.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>37. The good Gualdrada was a daughter of Bellincion Berti, the simple citizen of Florence in the olden time, who used to walk the streets " begirt with bone and leather," as mentioned in the <i>Paradiso</i>, XV. 1 1 2. Villani, I. 37, reports a story of her with all the brevity of a chronicler. Boccaccio tells the same story, as if he were writing a page of the Decameron. In his version it runs as follows.</p>
							<p>"The Emperor Otho IV., being by chance in Florence and having gone to the festival of St. John, to make it more gay with his presence, it happened that to the church with the other city dames, as our custom is, came the wife of Messer Berto, and brought with her a daughter of hers called Gualdrada, who was still unmarried. And as they sat there with the others, the maiden being beautiful in face and figure, nearly all present turned round to look at her, and among the rest the Emperor. And having much commended her beauty and manners, he asked Messer Berto, who was near him, who she was. To which Messer Berto smiling answered: 'She is the daughter of one who, I dare say, would let you kiss her if you wished.' These words the young lady heard. being near the speaker; and somewhat troubled by the opinion her father seemed to have of her, that, if he wished it, she would suffer herself to be kissed by any one in this free way, rising, and looking a moment at her father, and blushing with shame, said: 'Father, do not make such courteous promises at the expense ot my modesty, for certainly, unless by violence, no one shall ever kiss me, except him whom you shall give me as my husband.' The Emperor, on hearing this, much commended the words and the young lady And calling forward a noble youth named Guido Beisangue, who was afterwards called Guido the Elder, who as yet had no wife, he insisted upon his marrying her; and gave him as her dowry a large territory in Cassentino and the Alps, and made him Count thereof."</p>
							<p>Ampere says in his <i>Voyage Dantesque</i>, page 242: "Near the battle-field of Campaldino stands the little town of Poppi, whose castle was built in 1230 by the father of the Arnolfo who built some years later the Palazzo Vecchio of Florence. In this castle is still shown the bedroom of the beautiful and modest Gualdrada."</p>
							<p>Francesco Sansovino, an Italian novelist of the sixteenth century, has made Gualdrada the heroine of one of his tales, but has strangely perverted the old tradition. His story may be found in Roscoe's <i>Italian Novelists</i>, III. p. 107.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>41. Tegghiajo Aldobrandi was a distinguished citizen of Florence, and opposed what Malespini calls "the ill counsel of the people," that war should be declared against the Sienese, which war resulted in the battle of Monte Aperto and the defeat of the Florentines.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>44. Jacopo Rusticucci was a rich Florentine gentleman, whose chief misfortune seems to have been an ill-assorted marriage. Whereupon the amiable Boccaccio in his usual Decameron style remarks: "Men ought not then to be over-hasty in getting married; on the contrary, they should come to it with much precaution." And then he indulges in five octavo pages against matrimony and woman in general.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>45. See Macchiavelli's story of <i>Belfagor</i>, wherein Minos and Rhadamanthus, and the rest of the infernal judges, are greatly surprised to hear an infinite number of condemned souls "lament nothing so bitterly as their folly in having taken wives, attributing to them the whole of their misfortune."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>70. Boccaccio, in his <i>Comento</i>, speaks of Guglielmo Borsiere as "a courteous gentleman of good breeding and excellent manners"; and in the <i>Decameron</i>, Gior. I. Nov. 8, tells of a sharp rebuke administered by him to Messer Ermino de' Grimaldi, a miser of Genoa.</p>
							<p>"It came to pass, that, whilst by spending nothing he went on accumulating wealth, there came to Genoa a well-bred and witty gentleman called Gulielmo Borsiere, one nothing like the courtiers of the present day; who. to the great reproach of the debauched dispositions of such as would now be reputed fine gentlemen, should more properly style themselves asses, brought up amidst the filthiness and sink of mankind, rather than in courts...</p>
							<p>"This Gulielmo, whom I before mentioned, was much visited and respected by the better sort of people at Genoa; when having made some stay here, and hearing much talk of Ermino's sordidness, he became desirous of seeing him. Now Ermino had been informed of Gulielmo's worthy character, and having, however covetous he was, some small sparks of gentility, he received him in a courteous manner, and, entering into discourse together, he took him, and some Genoese who came along with him, to see a fine house which he had lately built: and when he had showed every part of it, he said: 'Pray, sir, can you, who have heard and seen so much, tell me of something that was never yet seen, to have painted in my hall?' To whom Gulielmo, hearing him speak so simply, replied: 'Sir, I can tell you of nothing which has never yet been seen, that I know of; unless it be sneezing, or some thing of that sort; but if you please, I can tell you of a thing which, I believe, vou never saw.' Said Ermmo (little expecting such an answer as he received), 'I beg you would let me know what that is.' Gulielmo immediately replied, 'Paint Liberality.' When Ermino heard this, such a ^sudden shame seized him, as quite changed his temper from what it had hitherto been; and he said: 'Sir, I will have her painted in such a manner that neither you, nor any one else, shall be able to say, hereafter, that I am unacquainted with her.' And from that time such effect had Gulielmo's words upon him, he became the most liberal and courteous gentleman, and was the most respected, both by strangers and his own citizens, of any in Genoa."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>95. Monte Veso is among the Alps, between Piedmont and Savoy, where the Po takes its rise. From this point eastward to the Adriatic, all the rivers on the left or northern slope of the Apennines are tributaries to the Po, until we come to the Montone, which above Forli is called Acquacheta. This is the first which flows directly into the Adriatic, and not into the Po. At least it was so in Dante's time. Now, by some change in its course, the Lamone, farther north, has opened itself a new outlet, and is the first to make its own way to the Adriatic. See Barlow, <i>Contributions to the Study of the Divine Comedy</i>, p. 131. This comparison shows the delight which Dante took in the study of physical geography. To reach the waterfall of Acquacheta he traverses in thought the entire valley of the Po, stretching across the whole of Northern Italy.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>102. Boccaccio's interpretation of this line, which has been adopted by most of the commentators since his time, is as follows: "I was for a long time in doubt concerning the author's meaning in this line; but being by chance at this monastery of San Benedetto, in company with the abbot, he told me that there had once been a discussion among the Counts who owned the mountain, about building a village near the waterfall, as a convenient place for a settlement, and bringing into it their vassals scattered on neighboring farms; but the leader of the project dying, it was not carried into effect; and that is what the author says, <i>Ove dovea per mille</i>, that is, for many, <i>esser ricetto</i>, that is, home and habitation."</p>
							<p>Doubtless grammatically the words will bear this meaning. But evidently the idea in the author's mind, and which he wished to impress upon the reader's, was that of a waterfall plunging at a single leap down a high precipice. To this idea, the suggestion of buildings and inhabitants is wholly foreign, and adds neither force nor clearness. Whereas, to say that the river plunged at one bound over a precipice high enough for a thousand cascades, presents at once a vivid picture to the imagination, and I have interpreted the line accordingly, making the contrast between <i>una scesa</i> and <i>mille</i>. It should not be forgotten that, while some editions read <i>dovea</i>, others read <i>dovria</i>, and even <i>potria</i>.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>106. This cord has puzzled the commentators exceedinglv. Boccaccio, Volpi, and Venturi do not explain it. The anonymous author of the <i>Ottimo</i>, Benvenuto da Imola, Buti, Landino, Vellutello, and Daniello, all think it means fraud, which Dante had used in the pursuit of pleasure,—"the panther with the paintedskin." Lombardi is of opinion that, "by girding himself with the Franciscan cord, he had endeavored to restrain his sensual appetites, indicated by the panther; and still wearing the cord as a Tertiary of the Order, he makes it serve here to deceive Geryon, and bring him up." Biagioli understands by it " the humility with which a man should approach Science, because it is she that humbles the proud." Fraticelli thinks it means vigilance; Tommaseo, "the good faith with which he hoped to win the Florentines, and now wishes to deal with their fraud, so that it may not harm him"; and Gabrielli Rossetti says, "Dante flattered himself, acting as a sincere Ghibelline, that he should meet with good faith from his Guelf countrymen, and met instead with horrible fraud."</p>
							<p>Dante elsewhere speaks of the cord in a good sense. In <i>Purgatorio</i>, VII. 1 14, Peter of Aragon is "girt with the cord of every virtue," In <i>Inferno</i>, XXVII. 92, it is mortification, " the cord that used to make those girt with it more meagre"; and in <i>Paradiso</i>, XI. 87, it is humility, " that family which had already girt the humble cord."</p>
							<p>It will be remembered that St. Francis, the founder of the Cordeliers (the wearers of the cord), used to call his body <i>asino</i>, or ass, and to subdue it with the <i>capestro</i>, or halter. Thus the cord is made to symbolize the subjugation of the animal nature. This renders Lombardi's interpretation the most intelligible and satisfactory, though Virgil seems to have thrown the cord into the abyss simply because he had nothing else to throw, and not with the design of deceiving.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>112. As a man does naturally in the act of throwing.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>131. That Geryon, seeing the cord, ascends, expecting to find some <i>moine defroque</i>, and carry him down, as Lombardi suggests, is hardly admissible; for that was not his office. The spirits were hurled down to their appointed places, as soon as Minos doomed them. <i>Inferno</i>, V. 15.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>132. Even to a steadfast heart.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-17">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. In this Canto is described the punishment of Usurers, as sinners against Nature and Art. See Inf. XI. 109:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"And since the usurer takes another way, Nature herself and in her follower Disdains he, for elsewhere he puts his hope."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>The monster Geryon, here used as the symbol of Fraud, was born of Chrysaor and Callirrhoe, and is generally represented by the poets as having three bodies and three heads. He was in ancient times King of Hesperia or Spain, living on Erytheia, the Red Island of sunset, and was slain by Hercules, who drove away his beautiful oxen. The nimble fancy of Hawthorne thus depicts him in his Wonder-Book, p. 148:—</p>
							<p>"But was it really and truly an old man? Certainly at first sight it looked very like one; but on closer inspection, it rather seemed to be some kind of a creature that lived in the sea. For on his legs and arms there were scales, such as fishes have; he was web-footed and web-fingered, after the fashion of a duck; and his long beard, being of a greenish tinge, had more the appearance of a tuft of sea-weed than of an ordinary beard. Have you never seen a stick of timber, that has been long tossed about by the waves, and has got all overgrown with barnacles, and at last, drifting ashore, seems to have been thrown up from the very deepest bottom of the sea? Well, the old man would have put you in mind of just such a wave-tost spar."</p>
							<p>The three bodies and three heads, which old poetic fable has given to the monster Geryon, are interpreted by modern prose as meaning the three Balearic Islands, Majorca, Minorca, and Ivica, over which he reigned.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>10. Ariosto, Orlando Furioso, XIV. 87, Rose's Tr., thus depicts Fraud:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"With pleasing mien, grave walk, and decent vest, Fraud rolled her eyeballs humbly in her head; And such benign and modest speech possest. She might a Gabriel seem who A-ve said. Foul was she and deformed in all the rest; But with a mantle, long and widely spread. Concealed her hideous parts; and evermore Beneath the stole a poisoned dagger wore."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>The Gabriel saying Jve is from Dante, Purgatory, X. 40:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"One would have sworn that he was saying Ave"</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>17. Tartars nor Turks, "who are most perfect masters therein," says Boccaccio, " as we can clearly see in Tartarian cloths, which truly are so skilfully woven, that no painter with his brush could equal, much less surpass them. The Tartars are . . . ." And with this unfinished sentence close the Lectures upon Dante, begun by Giovanni Boccaccio on Sunday, August 9, 1373, in the church of San Stefano, in Florence. That there were some critics among his audience is apparent from this sonnet, which he addressed " to one who had censured his public Exposition of Dante." See D. G. Rosetti. Early Italian Poets, p. 447:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"If Dante mourns, there wheresoe'er he be, That such high fancies of a soul so proud Should be laid open to the vulgar crowd, (As, touching my Discourse, I 'm told by thee,) This were my grievous pain; and certainly My proper blame should not be disavowed; Though hereof somewhat, I declare aloud, Were due to others, not alone to me. False hopes, true poverty, and therewithal The blinded judgment of a host of friends, And their enteaties, made that I did thus. But of all this there is no gain at all Unto the thankless souls with whose base ends Nothing agrees that 's great or generous."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>18. Ovid, Metamorph. VI.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"One at the loom so excellently skilled That to the Goddess she refused to yield."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>57. Their love of gold still haunting them in the other world.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>59. The arms of the Gianfigliacci of Florence.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>63. The arms of the Ubbriachi of Florence.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>64. The Scrovigni of Padua.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>68. Vitaliano del Dente of Padua.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>73. Giovanni Bujamonte, who seems to have had the ill-repute of being the greatest usurer of his day, called here in irony the "sovereign cavalier."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>74. As the ass-driver did in the streets of Florence, when Dante beat him for singing his verses amiss. See Sacchetti, Nov. CXV.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>78. Dante makes as short work with these usurers, as if he had been a curious traveller walking through the Ghetto of Rome, or the Judengasse of Frankfort.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>107. Ovid, Metamorph. II., Addison's Tr.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Half dead with sudden fear he dropt the reins; The horses felt 'em loose upon their manes, And, flying out through all the plains above, Ran uncontrolled where'er their fury drove; Rushed on the stars, and through a pathless way Of unknown regions hurried on-the day. And now above, and now below they flew, And near the earth the burning chariot drew. At once from life and from the chariot driv'n, Th' ambitious boy fell thunder-struck from heav'n. The horses started with a sudden bound, And flung the reins and chariot to the ground: The studded harness from their necks they broke, Here fell a wheel, and here a silver spoke, Here were the beam and axle torn away; And, scatter'd o'er the earth, the shining fragments lay. The breathless Phaeton, with flaming hair. Shot from the chariot, like a falling star. That in a summer's ev'ning from the top Of heav'n drops down, or seems at least to drop; Till on the Po his blasted corpse was hurled, Far from his country, in the Western World."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>108. The Milky Way. In Spanish El camino de Santiago; in the Northern Mythology the pathway of the ghosts going to Valhalla.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>109. Ovid, Metamorph. VIII., Croxall's Tr.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"The soft'ning wax, that felt a nearer sun, Dissolv'd apace, and soon began to run. The youth in vain his melting pinions shakes, His feathers gone, no longer air he takes. O father, father, as he strove to cry, Down to the sea he tumbled from on high. And found his fate; yet still subsists by fame, Among those waters that retain his name. The father, now no more a father, cries. Ho, Icarus! where are you? as he flies: Where shall I seek my boy? he cries again. And saw his feathers scattered on the main."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>136. Lucan, Pharsal. I.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"To him the Balearic sling is slow. And the shaft loiters from the Parthian bow."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-18">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. Here begins the third division of the Inferno, embracing the Eighth and Ninth Circles, in which the Fraudulent are punished.</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"But because fraud is man's peculiar vice More it displeases God; and so stand lowest The fraudulent, and greater dole assails them."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>The Eighth Circle is called Malebolge, or Evil-budgets, and consists of ten concentric ditches, or Bolge of stone, with dikes between, and rough bridges running across them to the centre like the spokes of a wheel. In the First Bolgia are punished Seducers, and in the Second, Flatterers.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>2. Mr. Ruskin, Modern Painters, III. p. 237, says:—</p>
							<p>"Our slates and granites are often of very lovely colors; but the Apennine limestone is so gray and toneless, that I know not any mountain district so utterly melancholy as those which are composed of this rock, when unwoodcd. Now, as far as I can discover from the internal evidence in his poem, nearly all Dante's mountain wanderings had been upon this ground. He had journeyed once or twice among the Alps, indeed, but seems to have been impressed chiefly by the road from Garda to Trent, and that along the Cornice, both of which are either upon those limestones, or a dark serpentine, which shows hardly any color till it is polished. It is not ascertainable that he had ever seen rock scenery of the finely colored kind, aided by the Alpine mosses: I do not know the fall at Forli (Inferno, XVI. 99), but every other scene to which he alludes is among these Apennine limestones; and when he wishes to give the idea of enormous mountain size, he names Tabernicch and Pietra-pana,—the one clearly chosen only for the sake of the last syllable of its name, in order to make a sound as of crackling ice, with the two sequent rhymes of the stanza,—and the other is an Apennine near Lucca.</p>
							<p>"His idea, therefore, of rock color, founded on these experiences, is that of a dull or ashen gray, more or less stained by the brown of iron ochre, precisely as the Apennine limestones nearly always are; the gray being peculiarly cold and disagreeable. As we go down the very hill which stretches out from Pietra-pana towards Lucca, the stones laid by the road-side to mend it are of this ashen gray, with efflorescences of manganese and iron in the fissures. The whole of Malebolge is made of this rock, ' All wrought in stone of iron-colored grain.'"</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>29. The year of Jubilee 1300. Mr. Norton, in his Notes of Travel and Study in Italy, p. 255, thus describes it:—</p>
							<p>"The beginning of the new century brought many pilgrims to the Papal city, and the Pope, seeing to what account the treasury of indulgences possessed by the Church might now be turned, hit upon the plan of promising plenary indulgence to all who, during the year, should visit with fit dispositions the holy places of Rome. He accordingly, in the most solemn manner, proclaimed a year of Jubilee, to date from the Christmas of 1299, and appointed a similar celebration for each hundredth year thereafter. The report of the marvellous promise spread rapidly through Europe; and as the year advanced, pilgrims poured into Italy from remote as well as from neighboring lands. The roads leading to Rome were dusty with bands of travellers pressing forward to gain the unwonted indulgence. The Crusades had made travel familiar to men, and a journey to Rome seemed easy to those who had dreamed of the Farther East, of Constantinople, and Jerusalem. Giovanni Villani, who was among the pilgrims from Florence, declares that there were never less than two hundred thousand strangers at Rome during the year; and Guglielmo Ventura, the chronicler of Asti, reports the total number of pilgrims at not less than two millions. The picture which he draws of Rome during the Jubilee is a curious one. ' Mirandum est quod passim ibant viri et mulieres, qui anno illo Roma fuerunt quo ego ibi fui et per dies XV. steti. De pane, vino, carnibus, piscibus, et avena, bonum mercatum ibi erat; foenum carissimum ibi fuit; hospitia carissima; taliter quod lectus meus et equi mei super fceno et avena constabat mihi tornesium unum grossum. Exiens de Roma in Vigilia Nativitatis Christi, vidi turbam magnam, quam dinumerare nemo pot erat; et fama erat inter Romanos, quod ibi fuerant plusquam vigenti centum millia virorum et muUerum. Pluries ego vidi ibi tam viros quam mulieres conculcatos sub pedibus aliorum ,• et etiam egomet in eodem periculo plures vices evasi. Papa innumerabilem pecuntam ab eisdem recepit, quia die ac nocte duo clerici stabant ad altare Sancti Pauli tenentes in corum manibus rastcUos, rastellantes pecuniam infinitam.'' To accommodate the throng of pilgrims, and to protect them as far as possible from the danger which Ventura feelingly describes, a barrier was erected along the middle of the bridge under the castle of Sant' Angelo, so that those going to St. Peter's and those coming from the church, passing on opposite sides, might not interfere with each other. It seems not unlikely that Dante himself was one of the crowd who thus crossed the old bridge, over whose arches, during this year, a flood of men was flowing almost as constantly as the river's flood ran through below."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>31. The castle is the Castle of St. Angelo, and the mountain Monte Gianicolo. See Barlow, Study of Dante, p. 126. Others say Monte Giordano.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>50. "This Caccianimico," says Benvenuto da Imola, "was a Bolognese; a liberal, noble, pleasant, and very powerful man." Nevertheless he was so utterly corrupt as to sell his sister, the fair Ghisola, to the Marquis of Este.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>51. In the original the word is salse. "In Bologna," says Benvenuto da Imola, "the name of Salse is given to a certain valley outside the city, and near to Santa Maria in Monte, into which the mortal remains of desperadoes, usurers, and other infamous persons are wont to be thrown. Hence I have sometimes heard boys in Bologna say to each other, by way of insult, * Your father was thrown into the Sake:"</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>61. The two rivers between which Bologna is situated. In the Bolognese dialect sipa is used for si.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>72. They cease going round the circles as heretofore, and now go straight forward to the centre of the abyss.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>86. For the story of Jason, Medea, and the Golden Fleece, see Ovid, Metamorph. VII. Also Chaucer, Legende of Goode Women:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Thou roote of fals loveres, duke Jason! Thou slye devourer and confusyon Of gentil wommen, gentil creatures!"</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>92. When the women of Lemnos put to death all the male inhabitants of the island, Hypsipyle concealed her father Thoas, and spared his life. Apollonius Rhodius, Argonautics, II., Fawkes's Tr.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Hypsipyle alone, illustrious maid, Spared her sire Thoas, who the sceptre swayed."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>122. "Allessio Interminelli," says Benvenuto da Imola, "a soldier, a nobleman, and of gentle manners, was of Lucca, and from him descended that tyrant Castruccio who filled all Tuscany with fear, and was lord of Pisa, Lucca, and Pistoja, of whom Dante makes no mention, because he became illustrious after the author's death. Alessio took such delight in flattery, that he could not open his mouth without flattering. He besmeared everybody, even the lowest menials." The Ottimo says, that in the dialect of Lucca the head " was facetiously called a pumpkin."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>133. Thais, the famous courtesan of Athens. Terence, The Eunucb, Act III. Sc. i:—</p>
							<p>"Thraso. Did Thais really return me many thanks?</p>
							<p>"Gnatho. Exceeding thanks.</p>
							<p>"Thraso. Was she delighted, say you?</p>
							<p>"Gnatho. Not so much, indeed, at the present itself, as because it was given by you; really, in right earnest, she does exult at that."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>136. "The filthiness of some passages," exclaims Landor, Pentameron, p. 15, "would disgrace the drunkenest horse-dealer; and the names of such criminals are recorded by the poet, as would be forgotten by the hangman in six months."</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-19">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. The Third Bolgia is devoted to the Simoniacs, so called from Simon Magus, the Sorcerer mentioned in Acts viii. 9, 18. See Par. XXX. Note 147.</p>
							<p>Brunetto Latini touches lightly upon them in the Tesoretto, XXI. 259, on the account of their high ecclesiastical dignity. His pupil is less reverential in the particular.</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Altri per simonia Si getta in mala via, E Dio e' Santi offende Evende le prebende, E Sante Sagramente, E mette ’nfra la gente Assempri di mal fare. Ma questo lascio stare, Chii tocca a ta' persone, Che non e mia ragione Di dime lungamente."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>Chaucer, Persones Tale, speaks thus of Simony:—</p>
							<p>"Certes simonie is cleped of Simon Magus, that wold have bought for temporel catel the yefte that God had yeven by the holy gost to Seint Peter, and to the Apostles: and therfore understond ye, that both he that selleth and he that byeth thinges spirituel ben called Simoniackes, be it by catel, be it by procuring, or by fleshly praier of his frendes, fleshly frendes, or spirituel frendes, fleshly in two maners, as by kinrede or other frendes: sothly, if they pray for him that is not worthy and able, it is simonie, if he take the benefice: and if he be worthy and able, ther is non."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>5. Gower, Confes. Amant. I.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"A trompe with a sterne breth, Which was cleped the trompe of deth. He shall this dredfull trompe blowe To-fore his gate and make it knowe, How that the jugement is yive Of deth, which shall nought be foryive."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>19. Lami, in his DeUcics Eruditorum, makes a strange blunder in reference to this passage. He says: " Not long ago the baptismal font, which stood in the middle of Saint John's at Florence, was removed; and in the pavement may still be seen the octagonal shape of its ample outline. Dante says, that, when a boy, he fell into it and was near drowning; or rather he fell into one of the circular basins of water, which surrounded the principal font." Upon this Arrivabeni, Comento Storico, p. 588, where I find this extract, remarks: "Not Dante, but Lami, staring at the moon, fell into the hole."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>20. Dante's enemies had accused him of committing this act through impiety. He takes this occasion to vindicate himself.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>33. Probably an allusion to the red stockings worn by the Popes.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>50. Burying alive with the head downward and the feet in the air was the inhuman punishment of hired assassins, "according to justice and the municipal law in Florence," says the Ottimo. It was called Propagginare, to plant in the manner of vine-stocks.</p>
							<p>Dante stood bowed down like the confessor called back by the criminal in order to delay the moment of his death.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>53. Benedetto Gaetani, Pope Boniface VIII. Gower, Conf. Amant. II., calls him</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Thou Boneface, thou proude clerke, Misleder of the papacie."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>This is the Boniface who frightened Celestine from the papacy, and persecuted him to death after his resignation. " The lovely Lady " is the Church. The fraud was his collusion with Charles H. of Naples. " He went to King Charles by night, secretly, and with few attendants," says Villani,Vin. ch. 6, " and said to him: ' King, thy Pope Celestine had the will and the power to serve thee in thy Sicilian wars, but did ncK; know how: but if thou wilt contrive with thy friends the cardinals to have me elected Pope, I shall know how, and shall have the will and the power'; promising upon his faith and oath to aid him with all the power of the Church." Farther on he continues: "He was very magnanimous and lordly, and demanded great honor, and knew well how to maintain and advance the cause of the Church, and on account of his knowledge and power was much dreaded and feared. He was avaricious exceedingly in order to aggrandize the Church and his relations, not being over-scrupulous about gains, for he said that all things were lawful which were of the Church."</p>
							<p>He was chosen Pope in 1294. "The inauguration of Boniface," says Milman, Latin Christ., Book IX., ch. 7, " was the most magnificent which Rome had ever beheld. In his procession to St. Peter's and back to the Lateran palace, where he was entertained, he rode not a humble ass, but a noble white horse, richly caparisoned: he had a crown on his head; the King of Naples held the bridle on one side, his son, the King of Hungary, on the other. The nobility of Rome, the Orsinis, the Colonnas, the Savellis, the Stefaneschi, the Annibaldi, who had not only welcomed him to Rome, but conferred on him the Senatorial dignity, followed in a body: the procession could hardly force its way through the masses of the kneeling people. In the midst, a furious hurricane burst over the city, and extinguished every lamp and torch in the church. A darker omen followed: a riot broke out among the populace, in which forty lives were lost. The day after, the Pope dined in public in the Lateran; the two Kings waited behind his chair."</p>
							<p>Dante indulges towards him a fierce Ghibelline hatred, and assigns him his place of torment before he is dead. In Canto XXVII. 85, he calls him "the Prince of the new Pharisees"; and, after many other bitter allusions in various parts of the poem, puts into the mouth of St. Peter, Par. XXVII. 22, the terrible invective that makes the whole heavens red with anger.</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"He who usurps upon the earth my place, My place, my place, which vacant has become Now in the presence of the Son of God, Has of my cemetery made a sewer Of blood and fetor, whereat the Perverse, Who fell from here, below there is appeased."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>He died in 1303. See Note 87, Purg. XX.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>70. Nicholas III., of the Orsini (the Bears) of Rome, chosen Pope in 1277. "He was the first Pope, or one of the first," says Villani, VII. ch. 54, " in whose court simony was openly practised." On account of his many accomplishments he was surnanicd Il Compiuto. Milman, Lat. Christ., Book XI. ch. 4, says of him: "At length the election fell on John Gaetano, of the noble Roman house, the Orsini, a man of remarkable beauty of person and demeanor. His name, 'the Accomplished,' implied that in him met all the graces of the handsomest clerks in the world, but he was a man likewise of irreproachable morals, of vast ambition, and of great ability." He died in 1280.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>83. The French Pope Clement V., elected in 1305, by the influence of Philip the Fair of France, with sundry humiliating conditions. He transferred the Papal See from Rome to Avignon, where it remained for seventy-one years in what Italian writers call its " Babylonian captivity." He died in 1 3 14, on his way to Bordeaux. " He had hardly crossed the Rhone," says Milman, Lat. Christ., Book XH. ch. 5, " when he was seized with mortal sickness at Roquemaure. The Papal treasure was seized by his followers, especially his nephew; his remains were treated with such utter neglect, that the torches set fire to the catafalque under which he lay, not in state. His body, covered only with a single sheet, all that his rapacious retinue had left to shroud their forgotten master, was half burned before alarm was raised. His ashes were borne back to Carpentras and solemnly interred."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>85. Jason, to whom Antiochus Epiphanes granted a "license to set him up a place for exercise, and for the training up of youth in the fashions of the heathen."</p>
							<p>2 Maccabees iv. 13: "Now such was the height of Greek fashions, and increase of the heathenish manners, through the exceeding profaneness of Jason, that ungodly wretch and not high priest, that the priests had no courage to serve any more at the altar, but, despising the temple, and neglecting the sacrifices, hastened to be partakers of the unlawful allowance in the place of exercise, after the game of Discus called them forth."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>87. Philip the Fair of France. See Note 82. " He was one of the handsomest men in the world," says Villani, IX. 66, "and one of the largest in person, and well proportioned in every limb,—a wise and good man for a layman."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>94. Matthew, chosen as an Apostle in the place of Judas.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>99. According to Villani, VII. 54, Pope Nicholas III. wished to marry his niece to a nephew of Charles of Anjou, King of Sicily. To this alliance the King would not consent, saying: "Although he wears the red stockings, his lineage is not worthy to mingle with ours, and his power is not hereditary." This made the Pope indignant, and, together with the bribes of John of Procida, led him to encourage the rebellion in Sicily, which broke out a year after the Pope's death in the " Sicilian Vespers," 1282.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>107. The Church of Rome under Nicholas, Boniface, and Clement. Revelation xvii. 1-3:—</p>
							<p>"And there came one of the seven angels which had the seven vials, and talked with me, saying unto me. Come hither; I will show unto thee the judgment of the great whore that sitteth upon many waters; with whom the kings of the earth have committed fornicaticn, and the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication. So he carried me away in the Spirit into the wilderness: and I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet-colored beast, full of names of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns."</p>
							<p>The seven heads are interpreted to mean the Seven Virtues, and the ten horns the Ten Commandments.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>110. Revelation xvW. 12, 13:—</p>
							<p>"And the ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings, and shall give their power and strength unto the beast."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>117. Gower, Confes. Amant., Prologus:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"The patrimonie and the richesse Which to Silvester in pure almesse The firste Constantinus lefte."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>Upon this supposed donation of immense domains by Constantine to the Pope, called the "Patrimony of St. Peter," Milman, Lat. Christ., Book I. ch. 2, remarks:—</p>
							<p>"Silvester has become a kind of hero of religious fable. But it was not so much the genuine mythical spirit which unconsciously transmutes history into legend; it was rather deliberate invention, with a specific aim and design, which, in direct defiance of history, accelerated the baptism of Constantine, and sanctified a porphyry vessel as appropriated to, or connected with, that holy use: and at a later period produced the monstrous fable of the Donation.</p>
							<p>"But that with which Constantine actually did invest the Church, the right of holding landed property, and receiving it by bequest, was far more valuable to the Christian hierarchy, and not least to the Bishop of Rome, than a premature and prodigal endowment."</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-20">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. In the Fourth Bolgia are punished the Soothsayers:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Because they wished to see too far before them, Backward they look, and backward make their way."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>9. Processions chanting prayers and supplications.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>13. Ignaro in Spenser's Faerie Queene, I. viii. 31:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"But very uncouth sight was to behold How he did fashion his untoward pace; For as he forward moved his footing old, So backward still was turned his wrinkled face."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>34. Amphiaraus was one of the seven kings against Thebes. Foreseeing his own fate, he concealed himself, to avoid going to the war; but his wife Eriphyle, bribed by a diamond necklace (as famous in ancient story as the Cardinal de Rohan's in modern), revealed his hiding-place, and he went to his doom with the others.</p>
							<p>Aeschylus. The Seven against Thebes: "I will tell of the sixth, a man most prudent and in valor the best, the seer, the mighty Amphiaraus And through his mouth he gives utterance to this speech * I, for my part, in very truth shall fatten this soil, seer as I am, buried beneath a hostile earth.'"</p>
							<p>Statius, Thebaid, VIII. 47, Lewis's Tr.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Bought of my treacherous wife for cursed gold, And in the list of Argive chiefs enrolled, Resigned to fate I sought the Theban plain; Whence flock the shades that scarce thy realm contain; When, how my soul yet dreads! an earthquake came, Big with destruction, and my trembling frame. Rapt from the midst of gaping thousands, hurled To night eternal in thy nether world."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>40. The Theban soothsayer. Ovid, Met., III., Addison's Tr.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"It happen'd once, within a shady wood, Two twisted snakes he in conjunction view'd, When with his staff their slimy folds he broke, And lost his manhood at the fatal stroke. But, after seven revolving years, he view'd The self-same serpents in the self-same wood: 'And if,' says he, ' such virtue in you lie, That he who dares your slimy folds untie Must change his kind, a second stroke I '11 try.' Again he struck the snakes, and stood again New-sex'd, and straight recovered into man. When Juno fired, More than so trivial an affair required. Deprived him, in her fury, of his sight. And left him groping round in sudden night. But Jove (for so it is in heav'n decreed That no one god repeal another's deed) Irradiates all his soul with inward light, And with the prophet's art relieves the want of sight."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>45. His beard. The word "plumes" is used by old English writers in this sense. Ford, Lady's Trial:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Now the down Of softness is exchanged for plumes of age."</p>
								<p>See also Purg. I. 42.</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>46. An Etrurian soothsayer. Lucan, Pharsalia, I., Rowe's Tr.:—</p>
							<p>"Of these the chief, for learning famed and age, Aruns by name, a venerable sage, At Luna lived."</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>Ruskin, Modern Painters, III. p. 246, says:—</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>"But in no part of the poem do we find allusion to mountains in any other than a stern light; nor the slightest evidence that Dante cared to look at them. From that hill of San Miniato, whose steps he knew so well, the eye commands, at the farther extremity of the Val d' Arno, the whole purple range* of the mountains of Carrara, peaked and mighty, seen always against the sunset light in silent outline, the chief forms that rule the scene as twilight fades away. By this vision Dante seems to have been wholly unmoved, and, but for Lucan's mention of Aruns at Luna, would seemingly not have spoken of the Carrara hills in the whole course of his poem: when he does allude to them, he speaks of their white marble, and their command of stars and sea, but has evidently no regard for the hills themselves. There is not a single phrase or syllable throughout the poem which indicates such a regard. Ugolino, in his dream, seemed to himself to be in the mountains, ' by cause of which the Pisan cannot see Lucca'; and it is impossible to look up from Pisa to that hoary slope without remembering the awe that there is in the passage; nevertheless it was as a hunting-ground only that he remembered these hills. Adam of Brescia, tormented with eternal thirst, remembers the hills of Romena, but only for the sake of their sweet waters."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>55. Manto, daughter of Tiresias, who fled from Thebes, the " City of Bacchus," when it became subject to the tyranny of Cleon.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>63. Lake Benacus is now called the Lago di Garda. It is pleasantly alluded to by Claudian in his " Old Man of Verona," who has seen " the grove grow old coeval with himself."</p>
							<p>"Verona seems To him remoter than the swarthy Ind; He deems the Lake Benacus as the shore Of the Red Sea."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>65. The Pennine Alps, or Alpes Poenae, watered by the brooklets flowing into the Sarca, which is the principal tributary of Benaco.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>69. The place where the three dioceses of Trent, Brescia, and Verona meet.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>70. At the outlet of the lake.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>77. Aeneid, X.:—</p>
							<p>"Mincius crowned with sea-green reeds."</p>
							<p>Milton, Lycidas:—</p>
							<p>"Smooth-sliding Mincius, crowned with vocal reeds."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>82. Manto. Benvenuto da Imola says: "Virgin should here be rendered Virago."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>93. Aeneid, X.: "Ocnus, .... son of the prophetic Manto, and of the Tuscan river, who gave walls and the name of his mother to thee, O Mantua!"</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>95. Pinamonte dei Buonacossi, a bold, ambitious man, persuaded Alberto, Count of Casalodi and Lord of Mantua, to banish to their estates the chief nobles of the city, and then, stirring up a popular tumult, fell upon the rest, laying waste their houses, and sending them into exile or to prison, and thus greatly depopulating the city.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>110. Iliad, L 69: "And Calchas, the son of Thestor, arose, the best of augurs, a man who knew the present, the future, and the past, and who had guided the ships of the Achsans to Ilium, by that power of prophecy which Phoebus Apollo gave him."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>112. Aeneid, II. 114: "In suspense we send Eurypylus to consult the oracle of Apollo, and he brings back from the shrine these mournful words: 'O Greeks, ye appeased the winds with blood and a virgin slain, when first yc came to the Trojan shores; your return is to be sought by blood, and atonement made by a Grecian life.'"</p>
							<p>Dante calls Virgil's poem a Tragedy, to mark its sustained and lofty style, in contrast with that of his own Comedy, of which he has already spoken once. Canto XVI. 138, and speaks again. Canto XXL 2; as if he wished the reader to bear in mind that he is wearing the sock, and not the buskin.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>116. "Michael Scott, the Magician," says Benvenuto da Imola, "practised divination at the court of Frederick II., and dedicated to him a book on natural history, which I have seen, and in which among other things he treats of Astrology, then deemed infallible It is said, moreover, that he foresaw his own death, but could not escape it. He had prognosticated that he should be killed by the falling of a small stone upon his head, and always wore an iron skull-cap under his hood, to prevent this disaster. But entering a church on the festival of Corpus Domini, he lowered his hood in sign of veneration, not of Christ, in whom he did not believe, but to deceive the common people, and a small stone fell from aloft on his bare head." The reader will recall the midnight scene of the monk of St. Mary's and William of Deloraine in Scott's La^ of the Last Minstrel, Canto II.:—</p>
							<p>"In these far climes it was my lot To meet the wondrous Michael Scott; A wizard of such dreaded fame That when, in Salamanca's cave, Him listed his magic wand to wave, The bells would ring in Notre Dame! Some of his skill he taught to me; And, warrior, I could say to thee The words that cleft Eildon hills in three, And bridled the Tweed with a curb of stone; But to speak them were a deadly sin; And for having but thought them my heart within, A treble penance must be done."</p>
							<p>And the opening of the tomb to recover the Magic Book:—</p>
							<p>"Before their eyes the wizard lay, As if he had not been dead a day. His hoary beard in silver rolled, He seemed some seventy winters old; A palmer's amice wrapped him round. With a wrought Spanish baldric bound. Like a pilgrim from beyond the sea; His left hand held his book of might; A silver cross was in his right; The lamp was placed beside his knee: High and majestic was his look. At which the fellest fiends had shook, And all unruffled was his face:—They trusted his soul had gotten grace." See also Appendix to the Lay of the Last Minstrel.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>118. Guido Bonatti, a tiler and astrologer of Fori, who accompanied Guido di Montefeltro when he marched out of Forli to attack the French " under the great oak." Villani, VII, 8i, in a passage in which the he and him get a little entangled, says: " It is said that the Count of Montefeltro was guided by divination and the advice of Guido Bonatti (a tiler who had become an astrologer), or some other strategy, and he gave the orders; and in this enterprise he gave him the gonfalon and said, * So long as a rag of it remains, wherever thou bearest it, thou shalt be victorious'; but I rather think his victories were owing to his own wits and his mastery in war."</p>
							<p>Benvenuto da Imola reports the following anecdote of the same personages. "As the Count was standing one day in the large and beautiful square of Forli, there came a rustic mountaineer and gave him a basket of pears. And when the Count said, * Stay and sup with me,' the rustic answered, * My Lord, I wish to go home before it rains; for infallibly there will be much rain to-day.' The Count, wondering at him, sent for Guido Bonatti, as a great astrologer, and said to him, 'Dost thou hear what this man says?' Guido answered, *He does not know what he is saying; but wait a little.* Guido went to his study, and, having taken his astrolabe, observed the aspect of the heavens. And on returning he said that it was impossible it should rain that day. But the rustic obstinately affirming what he had said, Guido asked him, * How dost thou know? ' The rustic answered, * Because to-day my ass, in coming out of the stable, shook his head and pricked up his ears, and whenever he does this, it is a certain sign that the weather will soon change.' Then Guido replied, * Supposing this to be so, how dost thou know there will be much rain?' 'Because,' said he, * my ass, with his ears pricked up, turned his head aside, and wheeled about more than usual.' Then, with the Count's leave, the rustic departed in haste, much fearing the rain, though the weather was very clear. And an hour afterwards, lo, it began to thunder, and there was a great down-pouring of waters, like a deluge. Then Guido began to cry out, with great indignation and derision, * Who has deluded me? Who has put me to shame? ' And for a long time this was a great source of merriment among the people."</p>
							<p>Asdente, a cobbler of Parma. "I think he must have had acuteness of mind, although illiterate; some having the gift of prophecy by the inspiration of Heaven." Dante mentions him in the Convito, IV. 16, where he says that, if nobility consisted in being known and talked about, "Asdente the shoemaker of Parma would be more noble than any of his fellow-citizens."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>126. The moon setting in the sea west of Seville. In the Italian popular tradition to which Dante again alludes. Par. II. 5 1, the Man in the Moon is Cain with his Thorns. This belief seems to have been current too in England, Midsummer 'Night's Dream, III. i: "Or else one must come in with a bush of thorns and a lantern, and say he comes to disfigure, or to present, the person of moon-shine." And again, V, i: " The man should be put into the lantern. How is it else the man i' the moon? All that I have to say is to tell you, that the lantern is the moon; I, the man in the moon; this thorn-bush, my thorn-bush; and this dog, my dog."</p>
							<p>The time here indicated is an hour after sunrise on Saturday morning.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-21">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. The Fifth Bolgia, and the punishment of Barrators, or "Judges who take bribes for giving judgment."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>2. Having spoken in the preceding Canto of Virgil's "lofty Tragedy," Dante here speaks of his own Comedy, as if to prepare the reader for the scenes which are lo follow, and for which he apologizes in Canto XXII. 14, by repeating the proverb,</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"In the church With saints, and in the tavern with carousers."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>7. Of the Arsenal of Venice Mr. Hillard thus speaks in his Six Months in Italy, I. 63:—</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>"No reader of Dante will fail to pay a visit to the Arsenal, from which, in order to illustrate the terrors of his * Inferno,' the great poet drew one of these striking and picturesque images, characteristic alike of the boldness and the power of his genius, which never hesitated to look for its materials among the homely details and familiar incidents of life. In his hands, the boiling of pitch and the calking of seams ascend to the dignity of poetry. Besides, it is the most impressive and characteristic spot in Venice. The Ducal Palace and the Church of St. Mark's are symbols of pride and power, but the strength of Venice resided here. Her whole history, for six hundred years, was here epitomized, and as she rose and sunk, the hum of labor here swelled and subsided. Here was the indexhand which marked the culmination and decline of her greatness. Built upon several small islands, which are united by a wall of two miles in circuit, its extent and completeness, decayed as it is, show what the naval power of Venice once was, as the disused armor of a giant enables us to measure his stature and strength. Near the entrance are four marble lions, brought by Morosini from the Peloponnesus in 1685, two of which are striking works of art. Of these two, one is by far the oldest thing in Venice, being not much younger than the battle of Marathon; and thus, from the height of twenty-three centuries, entitled to look down upon St. Mark's as the growth of yesterday. The other two are nondescript animals, of the class commonly called heraldic, and can be styled lions only by courtesy. In the armory are some very interesting objects, and none more so than the great standard of the Turkish admiral, made of crimson silk, taken at the battle of Lepanto, and which Cervantes may have grasped with his unwounded hand. A few fragments of some of the very galleys that were engaged in that memorable fight are also preserved here."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>37. Malebranche, Evil-claws, a general name for the devils.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>38. Santa Zita, the Patron Saint of Lucca, where the magistrates were called Elders, or Aldermen. In Florence they bore the name of Priors.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>41. A Barrator, in Dante's use of the word, is to the State what a Simoniac is to the Church; one who sells justice, office, or employment.</p>
							<p>Benvenuto says that Dante includes Bontura with the rest, " because he is speaking ironjcally, as who should say, 'Bontura is the greatest barrator of all.' For Bontura was an arch-barrator, who sagaciously led and managed the whole commune, and gave offices to whom he wished. He likewise excluded whom he wished."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>46. Bent down in the attitude of one in prayer j therefore the demons mock him with the allusion to the Santo P'olto.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>48. The Santo Volto, _or Holy Face, is a crucifix still preserved in the Cathedral of Lucca, and held in great veneration by the people. The tradition is that it is the vv^ork of Nicodemus, v^^ho sculptured it from memory. See also Sacchetti, Nov. 73, in which a preacher mocks at the Santo Folto in the church of Santa Croce at Florence.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>49. The Serchio flows near Lucca. Shelley, in a poem called The Boat, on the Serchio, describes it as a " torrent fierce,"</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Which fervid from its mountain source, Shallow, smooth, and strong, 'doth come j Swift as fire, tempestuously It sweeps into the affrighted sea. In morning's smile its eddies coil, Its billows sparkle, toss, and boil, Torturing all its quiet light Into columns fierce and bright."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>63. Canto IX. 22:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"True is it once before I here below Was conjured by that pitiless Erictho, Who summoned back the shades unto their bodies."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>95. A fortified town on the Arno, in the Pisan territory. It was besieged by the troops of Florence and Lucca in 1289, and capitulated. As the garrison marched out under safe-guard, they were terrified by the shouts of the crowd, crying: " Hang them! hang them!" In this crowd was Dante, " a youth of twenty-five," says Benvenuto da Imola.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>110. Along the circular dike that separates one Bolgia from another.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>111. This is a falsehood, as all the bridges over the next Bolgia are broken. See Canto XXIII. 140.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>112. At the close of the preceding Canto the time is indicated as being an hour after sunrise. Five hours later would be noon, or the scriptural sixth hour, the hour of the Crucifixion. Dante understands St. Luke to say that Christ died at this hour. Convito, IV. 23: " Luke says that it was about the sixth hour when he died; that is, the culmination of the day." Add to the "one thousand and two hundred sixtysix years," the thirty-four of Christ's life on earth, and it gives the vear i 300, the date of the Infernal Pilgrimage.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>114. Broken by the earthquake at the time of the Crucifixion, as the rock leading to the Circle of the Violent, Canto XII. 45:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"And at that moment this primeval rock Both here and elsewhere made such overthrow."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>As in the next Bolgia Hypocrites are punished, Dante couples them with the Violent, by making the shock of the earthquake more felt near them than elsewhere.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>125. The next crag or bridge, traversing the dikes and ditches.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>137. See Canto XVII. 75.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-22">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXII</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. The subject of the preceding Canto is continued in this.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>5. Aretino, Vita di Dante, says, that Dante in his youth was present at the " great and memorable battle, which befell at Campaldino, fighting valiantly on horseback in the front rank." It was there he saw the vaunt-couriers of the Aretines, who began the battle with such a vigorous charge, that they routed the Florentine cavalry, and drove them back upon the infantry.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>7. Napier, Florentine Hist., I. 214217, gives this description of the Carroccio and the Martinella of the Florentines:—</p>
							<p>"In order to give more dignity to the national army and form a rallying point for the troops, there had been established a great car, called the Carroccio, drawn by two beautiful oxen, which, carrying the Florentine standard, generally accompanied them into the field. This car was painted vermilion, the bullocks were covered with scarlet cloth, and the driver, a man or some consequence, was dressed in crimson, was exempt from taxation, and served without pay; these oxen were maintained at the public charge in a public hospital, and the white and red banner of the city was spread above the car between two lofty spars. Those taken at the battle of Monteaperto are still exhibited in Siena Cathedral as trophies of that fatal day.</p>
							<p>"Macchiavelli erroneously places the adoption of the Carroccio by the Florentines at this epoch, but it was long before in use, and probably was copied from the Milanese, as soon as Florence became strong and independent enough to equip a national army. Eribert, Archbishop of Milan, seems to have been its author, for in the war between Conrad I. and that city, besides other arrangements for military, organization, he is said to have finished by the invention of the Carroccio: it was a pious and not impolitic imitation of the ark as it was carried before the Israelites. This vehicle is described, and also represented in ancient paintings, as a four-wheeled oblong car, drawn by two, four, or six bullocks: the car was always red, and the bullocks, even to their hoofs, covered as above described, but with red or white according to the faction; the ensign staff was red, lofty, and tapering, and surmounted by a cross or golden ball: on this, between two white fringed veils, hung the national standard, and half-way down the mast, a crucifix. A platform ran out in front of the car, spacious enough for a few chosen men to defend it, while behind, on a corresponding space, the musicians with their military instruments gave spirit to the combat: mass was said on the Carroccio ere it quitted the city, the surgeons were stationed near it, and not unfrequently a chaplain also attended it to the field. The loss of the Carroccio was a great disgrace, and betokened utter discomfiture; it was given to the most distinguished knight, who had a public salary and wore conspicuous armor and a golden belt: the best troops were stationed round it, and there was frequently the hottest of the fight...</p>
							<p>"Besides the Carroccio, the Florentine army was accompanied by a great bell, called Martinella, or Campana degli Asini, which, for thirty days before hostilities began, tolled continually day and night from the arch of Porta Santa Maria, as a public declaration of war, and, as the ancient chronicle hath it, * for greatness of mind, that the enemy might have full time to prepare himself.' At the same time also, the Carroccio was drawn from its place in the offices of San Giovanni by the most distinguished knights and noble vassals of the republic, and conducted in state to the Mercato Nuovo, where it was placed upon the circular stone still existing, and remained there until the army took the field. Then also the Martinella was removed from its station to a wooden tower placed on another car, and with the Carroccio served to guide the troops by night and day. * And with these two pomps, of the Carroccio and Campana,' says Malespini, 'the pride of the old citizens, our ancestors, was ruled.'"</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>15. Equivalent to the proverb, "Do in Rome as the Romans do."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>48. Giampolo, or Ciampolo, say all the commentators; but nothing more is known of him than his name, and what he tells us here of his history.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>52. It is not very clear which King Thibault is here meant, but it is probably King Thibault IV., the crusader and poet, born 1201, died 1253. His poems have been published by Leveque de la Ravalli^re, under the title of Les Poesies du Roi de Navarre; and in one of his songs (Chanson 53) he makes a clerk address him as the Bans Rois Thiebaut. Dante cites him two or three times in his Volg. Eloq., and may have taken this expression from his song, as he does afterwards. Canto XXVIII. 135, /o Re jovcs, the Re Giovarje, or Young King, from the songs of Bertrand de Born.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>65. A Latian, that is to say, an Italian.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>82. This Frate Gomita was a Sardinian in the employ of Nino de' Visconti, judge in the jurisdiction of Gallura, the "gentle Judge Nino" oi Purg. VIII. 53. The frauds and peculations of the Friar brought him finally to the gallows. Gallura is the northeastern jurisdiction of the island.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>88. Don Michael Zanche was Seneschal of King Enzo of Sardinia, a natural son of the Emperor Frederick II. Dante gives him the title of Don, still used in Sardinia for Signore. After the death of Enzo in prison at Bologna, in 1271, Don Michael won by fraud and flattery his widow Adelasia, and became himself Lord of Logodoro, the northwestern jurisdiction, adjoining that of Gallura.</p>
							<p>The gossip between the Friar and the Seneschal, which is here described by Ciampolo, recalls the Fision of the Sardinian poet Araolla, a dialogue between himself and Gavino Sambigucci, written in the soft dialect of Logodoro, a mixture of Italian, Spanish, and Latin, and beginning:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Dulche, amara memoria de giornadas Fuggitivas cun doppia pena mia, Qui quanto plus 1' istringo sunt passadas."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>See Valery, Voyages en Corse et en Sardaigne, II. 410.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-23">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. In this Sixth Bolgia the Hypocrites are punished.</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"A painted people there below we found, Who went about with footsteps very slow, Weeping and in their looks subdued and weary."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>Chaucer, Knightes Tale, 2780:—</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"In his colde grave Alone, withouten any compagnie."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>And Gower, Conf. Amant.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"To muse in his philosophie Soje withouten compaignie."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>4. The Fables of j^sop, by Sir Roger L'Estrange, IV.: " There fell out a bloody quarrel once betwixt the Frogs and the Mice, about the sovereignty of the Fenns; and whilst two of their champions were disputing it at swords point, down comes a kite powdering upon them in the interim, and gobbles up both together, to part the fray."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>7. Both words signifying "now"; mo, from the Latin mode; and issa, from the Latin ipsa; meaning ipsa hora. " The Tuscans say mo," remarks Benvenuto, " the Lombards issa."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>37. "When he is in a fright and hurry, and has a very steep place to go down, Virgil has to carry him altogether," says Mr. Ruskin. See Canto XII., Note 2.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>63. Benvenuto speaks of the cloaks of the German monks as "ill-fitting and shapeless."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>66. The leaden cloaks which Frederick put upon malefactors were straw in comparison. The Emperor Frederick II. is said to have punished traitors by wrapping them in lead, and throwing them into a heated caldron. I can find no historic authority for this. It rests only on tradition; and on the same authority the same punishment is said to have been inflicted in Scotland, and is thus described in the ballad o^ "Lord Soulis," Scott's Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border, IV. 256:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"On a circle of stones they placed the pot, On a circle of stones but barely nine j They heated it red and fiery hot, , Till the burnished brass did glimmer and shine.</p>
								<p>"They roll'd him up in a sheet of lead, A sheet of lead for a funeral pall, And plunged him into the caldron red. And melted him, — lead, and bones, and all."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>We get also a glimpse of this punishment in Ducange, Glos. Capa Plumbea, where he cites the case in which one man tells another: "If our Holy Father the Pope knew the life you are leading, he would have you put to death in a cloak of lead."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>67. Comedy of Errors, IV. 2:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"A devil in an everlasting garment liath him."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>91. Bologna was renowned for its University; and the speaker, who was a Bolognese, is still mindful of his college.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>95. Florence, the beUissima e famosissima figlia di Roma, as Dante calls it, Convito, I. 3.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>103. An order of knighthood, established by Pope Urban IV. in 1261, under the title of " Knights of Santa Maria." The name Frati Gaudenti, or "Jovial Friars," was a nickname, because they lived in their own homes and were not bound by strict monastic rules. Napier, Flor. Hist. I. 269, says:—</p>
							<p>"A short time before this a new order of religious knighthood under the name of Frati Gaudenti began in Italy: it was not bound by vows of celibacy, or any very severe regulations, but took the usual oaths to defend widows and orphans and make peace between man and man: the founder was a Bolognese gentleman, called Loderingo di Liandolo, who enjoyed a good reputation, and along with a brother of the same order, named Catalano di Malavolti, one a Guelph and the other a Ghibclline, was now invited to Florence by Count Guido to execute conjointly the office of Podestil. It was intended by thus dividing the supreme authority between two magistrates of different politics, that one should correct the other, and justice be equally administered; more especially as, in conjunction with the people, they were allowed to elect a deliberative council of thirtysix citizens, belonging to the principal trades without distinction of party."</p>
							<p>Farther on he says that these two Frati Gaudenti " forfeited all public confidence by their peculation and hypocrisy." And Villani, VII. 13: " Although they were of different parties, under cover of a false hypocrisy, they were of accord in seeking rather their own private gains than the common good."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>108. A street in Florence, laid waste by the Guelfs.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>113. Hamlet, I. 2:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Nor windy suspiration of forced breath."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>115. Caiaphas, the High Priest, who thought " expedierkcy " the best thing.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>121. Annas, father-in-law of Caiaphas.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>134. The great outer circle surrounding this division of the Inferno.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>142. He may have heard in the lectures of the University an exposition of John viii. 44: " Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do: he was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speakcth a lie, he speaketh of his own; for he is a liar, and the father of it."</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-24">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. The Seventh Bolgia, in which Thieves are punished.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>2. The sun enters Aquarius during the last half of January, when the Equinox is near, and the hoar-frost in the morning looks like snow on the fields, but soon evaporates. If Dante had been a monk of Monte Casino, illuminating a manuscript, he could not have made a more clerkly and scholastic flourish with his pen than this, nor have painted a more beautiful picture than that which follows. The mediaeval poets are full of lovely descriptions of Spring, which seems to blossom and sing through all their verses; but none is more beautiful or suggestive than this, though serving only as an illustration.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>21. In Canto I.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>43. See what Mr. Ruskin says of Dante as " a notably bad climber," Canto XII. Note 2.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>55. The ascent of the Mount of Purgatory.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>73. The next circular dike, dividing the fosses.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>86. This list of serpents is from Lucan, Phars.W. 711, Rowe's Tr.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Slimy Chelyders the parched earth distain And trace a reeking furrow on the plain. The spotted Cenchris, rich in various dyes, Shoots in a line, and forth directly flies. The Swimmer there the crystal stream pollutes, And swift thro' air the flying Javelin shoots. The Amphisbaena doubly armed appears At either end a threatening head she rears; Raised on his active tail Pareas stands, And as he passes, furrows up the sands."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>Milton, Paraci. Lost, X. 521:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Dreadful was the din Of hissing through the hall, thick-swarming now With complicated monsters head and tail, Scorpion, and asp, and amphisbaena dire. Cerastes horned, hydrus, and elops drear, And dipsas."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>Of the Phareas, Peter Comestor, Hist. Scholast., Gloss of Genesis iii. i, says: *'And this he (Lucifer) did by means of the serpent; for then it was erect like man; being afterwards made prostrate by the curse; and it is said the Phareas walks erect even to this day."</p>
							<p>Of the Amphisbsna, Brunetto Latini, Tresor I. v. 140, says: " The Amphimenie is a kind of serpent which has two heads; one in its right place, and the other in the tail; and with each she can bite; and she runs swiftly, and her eyes shine like candles."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>93. Without a hiding-place, or the heliotrope, a precious stone of great virtue against poisons, and supposed to render the wearer invisible. Upon this latter vulgar error is founded Boccaccio's comical story of Calandrino and his friends Bruno and BufFulmacco, Decam., Gior. VIII., Nov. 3.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>107. Brunetto Latini, Tresor I. v. 164, says of the Phcenix: " He goeth to a good tree, savory and of good odor, and maketh a pile thereof, to which he setteth fire, and entereth straightway into it toward the rising of the sun."</p>
							<p>And Milton, Samson Agonist es, 1697:</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"So Virtue, given for lost, Depressed and overthrown, as seemed, Like that self-begotten bird In the Arabian woods embost, That no second knows nor third, And lay erewhile a holocaust. From out her ashy womb now teemed. Revives, reflourishes, then vigorous most When most unactive deemed; And, though her body die, her fame survives A secular bird ages of lives."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>114. Any obstruction, " such as the epilepsy," says Benvenuto. " Gouts and dropsies, catarrhs and oppilations," says Jeremy Taylor.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>125. Vanni Fucci, who calls himself a mule, was a bastard son of Fuccio de' Lazzari. All the commentators paint him in the darkest colors. Dante had known him as " a man of blood and wrath," and seems to wonder he is here, and not in the circle of the Violent, or of the Irascible. But his great crime was the robbery of a sacristy. Benvenuto da Imola relates the story in detail. He speaks of him as a man of depraved life, many of whose misdeeds went unpunished, because he was of noble family. Being banished from Pistoia for his crimes, he returned to the city one night of the Carnival, and was in company with eighteen other revellers, among whom was Vanni della Nona, a notary; when, not content with their insipid diversions, he stole away with two companions to the church of San Giacomo, and, finding its custodians absent, or asleep with feasting and drinking, he entered the sacristy and robbed it of all its precious jewels. These he secreted in the house of the notary, which was close at hand, thinking that on account of his honest repute no suspicion would fall upon him. A certain Rampino was arrested for the theft, and put to the torture; when Vanni Fucci, having escaped to Monte Carelli, beyond the Florentine jurisdiction, sent a messenger to Rampino's father, confessing all the circumstances of the crime. Hereupon the notary was seized " on the first Monday in Lent, as he was going to a sermon in the church of the Minorite Friars," and was hanged for the theft, and Rampino set at liberty. No one has a good word to say for Vanni Fucci, except the Canonico Crcscimbeni, who, in the Comentarj to the Istoria della Volg. Pocsia, II. ii., p. 99, counts him among the Italian Poets, and speaks of him as a man of great courage and gallantry, and a leader of the Neri party of Pistoia, in 1300. He smooths over Dante's invectives by remarking that Dante " makes not too honorable mention of him in the Comedy"; and quotes a sonnet of his, which is pathetic from its utter despair and self-reproach:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"For I have lost the good I might have had Through little wit, and not of mine own will."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>It is like the wail of a lost soul, and the same in tone as the words which Dante here puts into his mouth. Dante may have heard him utter similar selfaccusations while living, and seen on his face the blush of shame, which covers it here.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>143. The Neri were banished from Pistoia in 1301; the Bianchi, from Florence in 1302.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>145. This vapor or lightning flash from Val di Magra is the Marquis Malaspini, and the " turbid clouds " are the banished Neri of Pistoia, whom he is to gather about him to defeat the Bianchi at Campo Piceno, the old battle-field of Catiline. As Dante was of the Bianchi party, this prophecy of impending disaster and overthrow could only give him pain. See Canto VI. Note 65.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-25">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXV</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. The subject of the preceding Canto is continued in this.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>2. This vulgar gesture of contempt consists in thrusting the thumb between the first and middle fingers. It is the same that the ass-driver made at Dante in the street; Sacchetti, Nov. CXV.: " When he was a little way off, he turned round to Dante, and, thrusting out his tongue and making a fig at him with his hand, said, ' Take that.'"</p>
							<p>Villani, VI. 5, says: "On the Rock of Carmignano there was a tower seventy yards high, and upon it two marble arms, the hands of which were making the figs at Florence." Others say these hands were on a finger-post by the road-side.</p>
							<p>In the Merry Wives of Windsor, I. 3, Pistol says: "Convey, the wise it call; Steal! foh; a fico for the phrase!" And Martino, in Beaumont and Fletcher's Widow, V. I:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"The fig of everlasting obloquy Go with him."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>10. Pistoia is supposed to have been founded by the soldiers of Catiline. Brunetto Latini, Tresor, I. i. 37, says: " They found Catiline at the foot of the mountains and he had his army and his people in that place where is now the city of Pestoire. There was Catiline conquered in battle, and he and his were slain; also a great part of the Romans were killed. And on account of the pestilence of that great slaughter the city was called Pestoire."</p>
							<p>The Italian proverb says, Pistoia la ferrigna, iron Pistoia, or Pistoia the pitiless.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>15. Capaneus, Canto XIV. 44.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>19. See Canto XIII. Note 9.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>25. Cacus was the classic Giant Despair, who had his cave in Mount Aventine, and stole a part of the herd of Geryon, which Hercules had brought to Italy. Virgil, ^neid, VIII., Dryden's Tr.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"See yon huge cavern, yawning wide aiound, Where still the shattered mountain spreads the ground: That spacious hold grim Cacus once possessed, Tremendous fiend! half human, half a beast: Deep, deep as hell, the dismal dungeon lay, Dark and impervious to the beams of day. With copious slaughter smoked the purple floor. Pale heads hung horrid on the lofty door. Dreadful to view! and dropped with crimson gore."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>28. Dante makes a Centaur of Cacus, and separates him from the others because he was fraudulent as well as violent. Virgil calls him only a monster, a half-man, Semihominis Caci fades.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>35. Agnello Brunelleschi, Buoso degli Abati, and Puccio Sciancato.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>38. The story of Cacus, which Virgil was telling.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>43. Cianfa Donati, a Florentine nobleman. He appears immediately, as a serpent with six feet, and fastens upon Agnello Brunelleschi.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>65. Some commentators contend that in this line papiro does not mean paper, but a lamp-wick made of papyrus. This destroys the beauty and aptness of the image, and rather degrades</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"The leaf of the reed. Which has grown through the clefts in the ruins of ages."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>73. These four lists, or hands, are the fore feet of the serpent and the arms of Agnello.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>76. Shakespeare, in the "Additional Poems to Chester's Love's Martyrs," Knight's Shakespeare, VII. 193, speaks of" Two distincts, division none "; and continues:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Property was thus appalled That the self was not the same. Single nature's double name Neither two nor one was called. " Reason, in itself confounded, Saw division grow together; To themselves yet either neither, Simple were so well compounded."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>83. This black serpent is Guercio Cavalcanti, who changes form with Buoso degli Abati.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>95. Lucan, Phars., IX., Rowe's Tr.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"But soon a fate more sad with new surprise From the first object turns their wondering eyes. Wretched Sabellus by a Seps was stung: Fixed on his leg with deadly teeth it hung. Sudden the soldier shook it from the wound, Transfixed and nailed it to the barren groundOf all the dire, destructive serpent race. None have so much of death, though none are less. For straight around the part the skin withdrew, The flesh and shrinking sinews backward flew. And left the naked bones exposed to view. The spreading poisons all the parts confound, And the whole body sinks within the wound. Small relics of the mouldering mass were left, At once of substance as of form bereft; Dissolved, the whole in liquid poison ran, And to a nauseous puddle shrunk the man. So snows dissolved by southern breezes run. So melts the wax before the noonday sun. Nor ends the wonder here; though flames are known To waste the flesh, yet still they spare the bone: Here none were left, no least remains were seen. No marks to show that once the man had been. A fate of different kind Nasidius found, — A burning Prcster gave the deadly wound, And straight a sudden flame began to spread, And paint his visage with a glowing red. With swift expansion swells the bloated skin, — Naught but an undistinguished mass is seen, While the fair human form lies lost within; The puffy poison spreads and heaves around. Till all the man is in the monster drowned. No more the steely plate his breast can stay. But yields, and gives the bursting poison way. Not waters so, when fire the rage supplies. Bubbling on heaps, in boiling caldrons rise; Nor swells the stretching canvas half so fast, When the sails gather all the driving blast. Strain the tough yards, and bow the lofty mast. The various parts no longer now are known, One headless, formless heap remains alone."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>97. Ovid, Metamorph.y IV., Eusden's Tr.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"'Come, my Harmonia, come, thy face recline Down to my face: still touch what still is mine. O let these hands, while hands, be gently pressed, While yet the serpent has not all possessed.' More he had spoke, but strove to speak in vain, — The forky tongue refused to tell his pain, And learned in hissings only to complain. " Then shrieked Harmonia, ' Stay, my Cadmus, stay! Glide not in such a monstrous shape away! Destruction, like impetuous waves, rolls on. Where are thy feet, thy legs, thy shoulders, gone .'' Changed is thy visage, changed is all thy frame, — Cadmus is only Cadmus now in name. Ye Gods! my Cadmus to himself restore. Or me like him transform, — I ask no more.'"</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>And v., Maynwaring's Tr.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"The God so near, a chilly sweat possessed My fainting limbs, at every pore expressed; My strength distilled in drops, my hair in dew. My form was changed, and all my substance new: Each motion was a stream, and my whole frame Turned to a fount, which still preserves my name."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>See also Shelley's Arethusa:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Arethusa arose From her couch of snows In the Acroceraunian mountains, — From cloud and from crag With many a jag Shepherding her bright fountains. She leapt down the rocks, With her rainbow locks Streaming among the streams; Her steps paved with green The downward ravine Which slopes to the western gleams; And gliding and springing. She went, ever singing, In murmurs as soft as sleep. The Earth seemed to love her, And Heaven smiled above her. As she lingered towards the deep."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>144. Some editions read la penna, the pen, instead of la lingua, the tongue.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>151. Gaville was a village in the Valdarno, where Guercio Cavalcanti was murdered. The family took vengeance upon the inhabitants in the old Italian style, thus causing Gaville to lament the murder.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-26">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. The Eighth Bolgia, in which Fraudulent Counsellors are punished.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>4. Of these five Florentine nobles, Cianfa Donati, Agnello Brunelleschi, Buoso degli Abati, Puccio Sciancato, and Guercio Cavalcanti, nothing is known but what Dante tells us. Perhaps that is enough.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>7. See Purg. IX. 13:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Just at the hour when her sad lay begins The little swallow, near unto the morning, Perchance in memory of her former woes. And when the mind of man, a wanderer More from the flesh, and less by thought imprisoned, Almost prophetic in its visions is."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>9. The disasters soon to befall Florence, and in which even the neighboring town of Prato would rejoice, to mention no others. These disasters were the fall of the wooden bridge of Carraia, with a crowd upon it, witnessing a Miracle Play on the Arno; the strife of the Bianchi and Neri; and the great fire of 1304. See Villani, VIII. 70, 71. Napier, Florentine History, I. 394, gives this account:—</p>
							<p>"Battles first began between the Cerchi and Giugni at their houses in the Via del Garbo; they fought day and night, and with the aid of the Cavalcanti and Antellesi the former subdued all that quarter: a thousand rural adherents strengthened their bands, and that day might have seen the Neri's destruction if an unforseen disaster had not turned the scale. A certain dissolute priest, called Neri Abati, prior of San Piero Scheraggio, false to his family and in concert with the Black chiefs, consented to set fire to the dwellings of his own kinsmen in Orto-sanMichele; the flames, assisted by faction, spread rapidly over the richest and most crowded part of Florence: shops, warehouses, towers, private dwellings and palaces, from the old to the new market-place, from Vacchereccia to Porta Santa Maria and the Ponte Vecchio, all was one broad sheet of fire: more than nineteen hundred houses were consumed; plunder and devastation revelled unchecked amongst the flames, whole races were reduced in one moment to beggary, and vast magazines of the richest merchandise were destroyed. The Cavalcanti, one of the most opulent families in Florence, beheld their whole property consumed, and lost all courage; they made no attempt to save it, and, after almost gaining possession of the city, were finally overcome by the opposite faction."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>10. Macbeth, 1.7:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"If it were done when 't is done, then 't were well It were done quickly."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>23. See Parad. XII. 112:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"O glorious stars! O light impregnated With mighty virtue, from which I acknowledge All of my genius, whatsoe'er it be."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>24. I may not balk or deprive myself of this good.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>34. The Prophet Elisha, 2 Kings ii. 23:—</p>
							<p>"And he went up from thence unto Bethel; and as he was going up by the way, there came forth little children out of the city, and mocked him, and said unto him. Go up, thou bald head; go up, thou bald head. And he turned back, and looked on them, and cursed them in the name of the Lord: and there came forth two she-bears out of the wood, and tare forty and two children of them."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>35. 2 Kings ii. 11:—</p>
							<p>"And it came to pass, as they still went on and talked, that, behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and parted them both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>54. These two sons of CEdipus, Eteocles and Polynices, were so hostile to each other, that, when after death their bodies were burned on the same funeral pile, the flames swayed apart, and the ashes separated. Statius, Thebaid, XII. 430, Lewis's Tr.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Again behold the brothers! When the fire Pervades their limbs in many a curling 1 spire, The vast hill trembles, and the intruder's corse Is driven from the pile with sudden force. The flames, dividing at the point, ascend, And at each other adverse rays extend. Thus when the ruler of the infernal state, Pale-visaged Dis, commits to stern debate The sister-fiends, their brands, held forth to fight, Now clash, then part, and shed a transient light."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>56. The most cunning of the Greeks at the siege of Troy, now united in their punishment, as before in warlike wrath.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>59. As Troy was overcome by the fraud of the wooden horse, it was in a poetic sense the gateway by which .^neas went forth to establish the Roman empire in Italy.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>62. Deidamia was a daughter of Lycomedes of Scyros, at whose court Ulysses found Achilles, disguised in woman's attire, and enticed him away to the siege of Troy, telling him that, according to the oracle, the city could not be taken without him, but not telling him that, according to the same oracle, he would lose his life there.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>63. Ulysses and Diomed together stole the Palladium, or statue of Pallas, at Troy, the safeguard and protection of the city.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>75. The Greeks scorned all other nations as "outside barbarians." Even Virgil, a Latian, has to plead with Ulysses the merit of having praised him in the ^neid.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>108. The Pillars of Hercules at the straits of Gibraltar; Abyla on the African shore, and Gibraltar on the Spanish; in which the popular mind has lost its faith, except as symbolized in the columns on the Spanish dollar, with the legend. Plus ultra.</p>
							<p>Brunetto Latini, Tesor. IX. 119:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Appresso questo mare, Vidi diritto stare Gran colonne, le quali Vi mise per segnali Ercules il potente, Per mostrare alia gente Che loco sia finata La terra e terminata."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>125. Odyssey, XI. 155: "Well-fitted oars, which are also wings to ships."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>127. Humboldt, Personal Narrative, II. 19, Miss Williams's Tr., has this passage: " From the time we entered the torrid zone, we were never wearied with admiring, every night, the beauty of the Southern sky, which, as we advanced toward the south, opened new constellations to our view. We feel an indescribable sensation, when, on approaching the equator, and particularly on passing from one hemisphere to the other, we see those stars, which we have contemplated from our infancy, progressively sink, and finally disappear. Nothing atvakens in the traveller a livelier remembrance of the immense distance by which he is separated from his country, than the aspect of an unknown firmament. The grouping of the stars of the first magnitude, some scattered nebula, rivalling in splendor the milky way, and tracks of space remarkable for their extreme blackness, give a particular physiognomy to the Southern sky. This sight fills with admiration even those who, uninstructed in the branches of accurate science, feel the same emotion of delight in the contemplation of the heavenly vault, as in the view of a beautiful landscape, or a majestic site. A traveller has no need of being a botanist, to recognize the torrid zone on the mere aspect of its vegetation; and without having acquired any notions of astronomy, without any acquaintance with the celestial charts of Flamstead and De la Caille, he feels he is not in Europe, when he sees the immense constellation of the Ship, or the phosphorescent clouds of Magellan, arise on the horizon."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>142. Compare Tennyson's Ulysses:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"There lies the port; the vessel puffs her sail: There gloom the dark broad seas. My mariners, Souls that have toiled, and wrought, and thought with me, — That ever with a frolic welcome took The thunder and the sunshine, and opposed Free hearts, free foreheads, — you and I arc old; Old age hath yet his honor and his toil; Death closes all: but something ere the end, Some work of noble note, may yet be done, Not unbecoming men that strove with Gods. The lights begin to twinkle from the rocks: The long day wanes: the slow moon climbs; the deep Moans round with many voices. Come, my friends, 'T is not too late to seek a newer world. Push off, and, sitting well in order, smite The sounding furrows; for my purpose holds To sail beyond the sunset, and the baths Of all the western stars, until I die. It may be that the gulfs will wash us down: It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles, And see the great Achilles, whom we knew. Tho' much is taken, much abides; and tho' We are not now that strength which in old days Moved earth and heaven, that which we are, we are; One equal temper of heroic hearts. Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will To strive, to seek, to find, and njt to yield."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-27">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVII</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. The subject of the preceding Canto is continued in this.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>7. The story of the Brazen Bull of Perillus is thus told in the Gesta Romanorum. Tale 48, Swan's Tr.:—</p>
							<p>"Dionysius records, that when Perillus desired to become an artificer of Phalaris, a cruel and tyrannical king who depopulated the kingdom, and was guilty of many dreadful excesses, he presented to him, already too well skilled in cruelty, a brazen bull, which he had just constructed. In one of its sides there was a secret door, by which those who were sentenced should enter and be burnt to death. The idea was, that the sounds produced by the agony of the sufferer confined within should resemble the roaring of a bull; and thus, while nothing human struck the ear, the mind should be unimpressed by a feeling of mercy. The king highly applauded the invention, and said, * Friend, the value of thy industry is yet untried: more cruel even than the people account me, thou thyself shalt be the first victim.'"</p>
							<p>Also in Gower, Confes. Amant., VII.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"He had of counsell many one, Among the whiche there was one, By name which Berillus hight. And he bethought him how he might Unto the tirant do liking. And of his own ymagining Let forge and make a bulle of bras, And on the side cast there was A dore^ where a man may inne, Whan he his peine shall beginne Through fire, which that men put under. And all this did he for a wonder, That whan a man for peine cride, The bull of bras, which gapeth wide, It shulde seme, as though it were A bellewing in a mannes ere And nought the crieng of a man. But he, which alle sleightes can. The devil, that lith in helle fast, Him that it cast hath overcast, That for a trespas, which he dede, He was put in the same stede. And was himself the first of alle, Which was into that peine falle That he for other men ordeigneth."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>21. Virgil being a Lombard, Dante suggests that, in giving Ulysses and Diomed license to depart, he had used the Lombard dialect, saying, "hsa e en va." See Canto XXIII. Note 7.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>28. The inhabitants of the province of Romagna, of which Ravenna is the capital.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>29. It is the spirit of Guido da Montefeltro that speaks. The city of Montefeltro lies between Urbino and that part of the Apennines in which the Tiber rises. Count Guido was a famous warrior, and one of the great Ghibelline leaders. He tells his own story sufficiently in detail in what follows.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>40. Lord Byron, Don Juan, III. 105, gives this description of Ravenna, with an allusion to Boccaccio's Tale, versified by Dryden under the title of Theodore and Honoria:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Sweet hour of twilight! — in the solitude Of the pine forest, and the silent shore Which bounds Ravenna's immemorial wood, Rooted where once the Adrian wave flow'd o'er, To where the last Cjesarean fortress stood. Ever-green forest! which Boccaccio's lore And Dryden's lay made haunted ground to me, How have I loved the twilight hour and thee! "The shrill cicalas, people of the pine. Making their summer lives one ceaseless song. Were the sole echoes, save my steed's and mine, And vesper-bell's that rose the boughs along; The spectre huntsman of Onesti's line. His hell-dogs, and their chase, and the fair throng. Which learned from this example not to fly From a true lover, shadowed my mind's eye."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>Dryden's Theodore and Honor ia begins with these words:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Of all the cities in Romanian lands, The chief, and most renowned, Ravenna stands, Adorned in ancient times with arms and arts. And rich inhabitants, with generous hearts."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>It was at Ravenna that Dante passed the last years of his life, and there he died and was buried.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>41. The arms of Guido da Polenta, Lord of Ravenna, Dante's friend, and father (or nephew) of Francesca da Rimini, were an eagle half white in a field of azure, and half red in a field of gold. Cervia is a small town some twelve miles from Ravenna.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>43. The city of Forll, where Guido da Montefeltro defeated and slaughtered the French in 1282. See Canto XX. Note I 18.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>45. A Green Lion was the coat of arms of the Ordclaffi, then Lords of Forli.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>46. Malatesta, father and son, tyrants of Rimini, who murdered Montagna, a Ghibelline leader. Verrucchio was their castle, near the city. Of this family were the husband and lover of Francesca. Dante calls them mastiffs, because of their fierceness, making " wimbles of their teeth" in tearing and devouring.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>49. The cities of Facnza on the Lamone, and Imola on the Santerno. They were ruled by Mainardo, surnamed " the Devil," whose coat .of arms was a lion azure in a white field.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>52. The city of Cesena.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>67. Milton, Ptfr/7^. Zw/, in. 479:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Dying put on the weeds of Dominic, Or in Franciscan think to pass disguised."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>70. Boniface VIII. , who in line 85 is called "the Prince of the new Pharisees."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>81. Dante, Convito, \W 28, quoting Cicero, says; " Natural death is as it were a haven and rest to us after long navigation. And the noble soul is like a good mariner; for he, when he draws near the port, lowers his sails, and enters it softly with feeble steerage."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>86. This Papal war, which was waged against Christians, and not against pagan Saracens, nor unbelieving Jews, nor against the renegades who had helped them at the siege of Acre, or given them aid and comfort by traffic, is thus described by Mr. Norton, Travel and Study in Italy, p. 263:—</p>
							<p>"This *war near the Lateran* was a war with the great family of Colonna. Two of the house were Cardinals. They had been deceived in the election, and were rebellious under the rule of Boniface. The Cardinals of the great Ghibelline house took no pains to conceal their ill-will toward the Guelf Pope. Boniface, indeed, accused them of plotting with his enemies for his overthrow. The Colonnas, finding Rome unsafe, had withdrawn to their strong town of Palestrina, whence they could issue forth at will for plunder, and where they could give shelter to those who shared in their hostility toward the Pope. On the other hand, Boniface, not trusting himself in Rome, withdrew to the secure height of Orvieto, and thence, on the 14th of December, 1297, issued a terrible bull for a crusade against them, granting plenary indulgence to all, (such was the Christian temper of the times, and so literally were the violent seizing upon the kingdom of Heaven,) granting plenary indulgence to all who would take up arms against these rebellious sons of the Church and march against their chief stronghold, their 'alto seggio ' of Palestrina. They and their adherents had already been excommunicated and put under the ban of the Church; they had been stripped of all dignities and privileges; their property had been confiscated; and they were now by this bull placed in the position of enemies, not of the Pope alone, but of the Church Universal. Troops gathered against them from all quarters of Papal Italy. Their lands were ravaged, and they themselves shut up within their stronghold; but for a long time they held out in their ancient high-walled mountaintown. It was to gain Palestrina that Boniface * had war near the Lateran.' The great church and palace of the Lateran, standing on the summit of the Ccelian Hill, close to the city wall, overlooks the Campagna, which, in broken levels of brown and green and purple fields, reaches to the base of the encircling mountains. Twenty miles away, crowning the top and clinging to the side of one of the last heights of the Sabine range, are the gray walls and roofs of Palestrina. It was a far more conspicuous place at the close of the thirteenth century than it is now; for the great columns of the famous temple of Fortune still rose above the town, and the ancient citadel kept watch over it from its high rock. At length, in September, 1298, the Colonnas, reduced to the hardest extremities, became ready for peace. Boniface promised largely. The two Cardinals presented themselves before him at Rieti, in coarse brown dresses, and with ropes around their necks, in token of their repentance and submission. The Pope gave them not only pardon and absolution, but hope of being restored to their titles and possessions. This was the * lunga promessa con /' attender corto ',• for, while the Colonnas were retained near him, and these deceptive hopes held out to them, Boniface sent the Bishop of Orvieto to take possession of Palcstrina, and to destroy it utterly, leaving only the church to stand as a monument above its ruins. The work was done thoroughly; — a plough was drawn across the site of the unhappy town, and salt scattered in the furrow, that the land might thenceforth be desolate. The inhabitants were removed from the mountain to the plain, and there forced to build new homes for themselves, which, in their turn, two years afterwards, were thrown down and burned by order of the implacable Pope. This last piece of malignity was accomplished in 1 300, the year of the Jubilee, the year in which Dante was in Rome, and in which he saw Guy of Montefcltro, the counsellor of Boniface in deceit, burning in Hell."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>94. The story of Sylvester and Constantine is one of the legends of the Legenda Aurea. The part of it relating to the Emperor's baptism is thus ■condensed by Mrs. Jameson in her Sacred and Legendary Art, II. 313:—</p>
							<p>"Sylvester was born at Rome of virtuous parents; and at a time when Constantine was still in the darkness of idolatry and persecuted the Christians, Sylvester, who had been elected Bishop of Rome, fled from the persecution, and dwelt for some time in a cavern, near the summit of Monte Calvo. While he lay there concealed, the Emperor was attacked by a horrible leprosy: and having called to him the priests of his false gods, they advised that he should bathe himself in a bath of children's blood, and three thousand children were collected for this purpose. And as he proceeded in his chariot to the place where the bath was to be prepared, the mothers of these children threw themselves in his way with dishevelled hair, weeping, and crying aloud for mercy. Then Constantine was moved to tears, and he ordered his chariot to stop, and he said to his nobles and to his attendants who were around him, ' Far better is it that I should die, than cause the death of these innocents! ' And then he commanded that the children should be restored to their mothers with great gifts, in recompense of what they had suffered; so they went away full of joy and gratitude, and the Emperor returned to his palace.</p>
							<p>"On that same night, as he lay asleep, St. Peter and St. Paul appeared at his bedside: and they stretched their hands over him and said, * Because thou hast feared to spill the innocent blood, Jesus Christ has sent us to bring thee good counsel. Send to Sylvester, who lies hidden among the mountains, and he shall show thee the pool in which, having washed three times, thou shalt be clean from thy leprosy; and henceforth thou shalt adore the God of the Christians, and thou shalt cease to persecute and to oppress them.' Then Constantine, awaking from this vision, sent his soldiers in search of Sylvester. And when they took him, he supposed that it was to lead him to death; nevertheless he went cheerfully: and when he appeared before the Emperor, Constantine arose and saluted him, and said, * I would know of thee who are those two gods who appeared to me in the visions of the night?' And Sylvester replied, 'They were not gods, but the apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ.' Then Constantine desired that he would show him the effigies of these two apostles; and Sylvester sent for two pictures of St. Peter and St. Paul, which were in the possession of certain pious Christians. Constantine, having beheld them, saw that they were the same who had appeared to him in his dream. Then Sylvester baptized him, and he came out of the font cured of his malady."</p>
							<p>Gower also, Confes. Amantis, II., tells the story at length:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"And in the while it was begunne A light, as though it were a sunne, Fro heven Into the place come Where that he toke his christendome, And ever amonge the holy tales Lich as they weren fisches scales They fellen from him now and efte, Till that there was nothing belefte Of all this grete maladie."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>96. Montefeltro was in the Franciscan monastery at Assisi.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>102. See Note 86 of this Canto. Dante calls the town Penestrino from its Latin name Prjeneste.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>105, Pope Celestine V., who made " the great refusal," or abdication of the papacy. See Canto III. Note 59.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>118. Gower, Confes. Amantis, II.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"For shrifte stant of no value To him, that woll him nought vertue, To leve of vice the folie, For worde is wind, but the maistrie Is, that a man himself defende Of thing whiche is nought to commende, Wherof ben fewe now a day."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-28">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVIII</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. The Ninth Bolgia, in which are punished the Schismatics, and</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"where is paid the fee By those who sowing discord win their burden"</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>a burden difficult to describe even with untrammelled words, or in plain prose, free from the fetters of rhyme.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>9. Apulia, or La Puglia, is in the southeastern part of Italy, "between the spur and the heel of the boot."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>10. The people slain in the conquest of Apulia by the Romans. Of the battle of Maleventum, Livy, X. 15, says:—</p>
							<p>"Here likewise there was more of flight than of bloodshed. Two thousand of the Apulians were slain, and Decius, despising such an enemy, led his legions into Samnium."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>11. Hannibal's famous battle at Cannae, in the second Punic war. According to Livy, XXII. 49, "The number of the slain is computed at forty thousand foot, and two thousand seven hundred horse."</p>
							<p>He continues, XXII. 51, Baker's Tr.: "On the day following, as soon as light appeared, his troops applied themselves to the collecting of the spoils, and viewing the carnage made, which was such as shocked even enemies; so many thousand Romans, horsemen and footmen, lay promiscuously on the field, as chance had thrown them together, either in the battle, or flight. Some, whom their wounds, being pinched by the morning cold, had roused from their posture, were put to death by the enemy, as they were rising up, all covered with blood, from the midst of the heaps of carcasses. Some they found lying alive, with their thighs and hams cut, who, stripping their necks and throats, desired them to spill what remained of their blood. Some were found, with their heads buried in the earth, in holes which it appeared they had made for themselves, and covering their faces with earth thrown over them, had thus been suffocated. The attention of all was particularly attracted by a living Numidian with his nose and ears mangled, stretched under a dead Roman, who lay over him, and who, when his hands had been rendered unable to hold a weapon, his rage being exasperated to madness, had expired in the act of tearing his antagonist with his teeth."</p>
							<p>When Mago, son of Hamilcar, carried the news of the victory to Carthage, " in conformation of his joyful intelligence," says the same historian, XXIII. 12, "he ordered the gold rings taken from the Romans to be poured down in the porch of the senate-house, and of these there was so great a heap that, according to some writers, on being measured, they filled three pecks and a half; but the more general account, and likewise the more probable is, that they amounted to no more than one peck. He also explained to them, in order to show the greater extent of the slaughter, that none but those of equestrian rank, and of these only the principal, wore this ornament."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>14. Robert Guiscard, the renowned Norman conqueror of southern Italy. Dante places him in the Fifth Heaven of Paradise, in the planet Mars. For an account of his character and achievements see Gibbon, Ch. LVI. See also Par ad. XVIII. Note 20.</p>
							<p>Matthew Paris, Giles's Tr., I. 171, A. D. 1239, gives the following account of the manner in which he captured the monastery of Monte Cassino:—</p>
							<p>"In the same year, the monks of Monte Cassino (where St. Benedict had planted a monastery), to the number of thirteen, came to the Pope in old and torn garments, with dishevelled hair and unshorn beards, and with tears in their eyes; and on being introduced to the presence of his Holiness, they fell at his feet, and laid a complaint that the Emperor had ejected them from their house at Monte Cassino. This mountain was impregnable, and indeed inaccessible to any one unless at the will of the monks and others who dwelt on it; however R. Guiscard, by a device, pretending that he was dead and being carried thither on a bier, thus took possession of the monks' castle. When the Pope heard this, he concealed his grief, and asked the reason; to which the monks replied, * Because, in obedience to you, we excommunicated the Emperor.' The Pope then said, ' Your obedience shall save you'; on which the monks went away without receiving anything more from the Pope."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>16. The battle of Ceperano, near Monte Cassino, was fought in 1265, between Charles of Anjou and Manfred, king of Apulia and Sicily. The Apulians, seeing the battle going against them, deserted their king and passed over to the enemy.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>17. The battle of Tagliacozzo in Abruzzo was fought in 1268, between Charles of Anjou and Curradino or Conradin,nephew of Manfred. Charles gained the victory by the strategy of Count Alardo di Valleri, who,</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"weaponless himself, Made arms ridiculous."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>This valiant but wary crusader persuaded the king to keep a third of his forces in reserve; and when the soldiers of Curradino, thinking they had won the day, were scattered over the field in pursuit of plunder, Charles fell upon them, and routed them.</p>
							<p>Alardo is mentioned in the Cento Novelle Antiche, Nov. LVIL, as " celebrated for his wonderful prowess even among the chief nobles, and no less esteemed for his singular virtues than for his courage."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>31. Gibbon, ch. L., says: "At the conclusion of the Life of Mahomet, it may perhaps be expected that I should balance his faults and virtues, that I should decide whether the title of enthusiast or impostor more properly belongs to that extraordinary man. Had I been intimately conversant with the son of Abdallah, the task would still be difficult, and the success uncertain; at the distance of twelve centuries, I darkly contemplate his shade through a cloud of religious incense; and could I truly delineate the portrait of an hour, the fleeting resemblance would not equally apply to the solitary of Mount Hera, to the preacher of Mecca, and to the conqueror of Arabia From enthusiasm to imposture the step is perilous and slippery; the daemon of Socrates affords a memorable instance how a wise man may deceive himself, how a good man may deceive others, how the conscience may slumber in a mixed and middle state between self-illusion and voluntary fraud."</p>
							<p>Of Ali, the son-in-law and faithful follower of Mahomet, he goes on to say: " He united the qualifications of a poet, a soldier, and a saint; his wisdom still breathes in a collection of moral and religious sayings; and every antagonist, in the combats of the tongue or of the sword, was subdued by his eloquence and valor. From the first hour of his mission to the last rites of his funeral, the apostle was never forsaken by a generous friend, whom he delighted to name his brother, his vicegerent, and the faithful Aaron of a second Moses."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>55. Fra Dolcino was one of the early social and religious reformers in the North of Italy. His sect bore the name of " Apostles," and its chief, if not only, heresy was a desire to bring back the Church to the simplicity of the apostolic times. In 1305 he withdrew with his followers to the mountains overlooking the Val Sesia in Piedmont, where he was pursued and besieged by the Church party, and, after various fortunes of victory and defeat, being reduced by " stress of snow " and famine, was taken prisoner, together with his companion, the beautiful Margaret of Trent. Both were burned at Vercelli on the ist of June, 1307. This "last act of the tragedy" is thus described by Mr. Mariotti, Historical Memoir of Fra Dolcino and his Times, p. 290:—</p>
							<p>"Margaret of Trent enjoyed the precedence due to her sex. She was first led out into a spot near Vercelli, bearing the name of 'Arena Servi,' or more properly * Arena Cervi,' in the sands, that is, of the torrent Cervo, which has its confluent with the Sesia at about one mile above the city. A high stake had been erected in a conspicuous part of the place. To this she was fastened, and a pile of wood was reared at her feet. The eyes of the inhabitants of town and country were upon her. On her also were the eyes of Dolcino. She was burnt alive with slow fire.</p>
							<p>"Next came the turn of Dolcino: he was seated high on a car drawn by oxen, and thus paraded from street to street all over Vercelli. His tormentors were all around him. Beside the car, iron pots were carried, filled with burning charcoals; deep in the charcoals were iron pincers, glowing at white heat. These pincers were continually applied to the various parts of Dolcino's naked body, all along his progress, till all his flesh was torn piecemeal from his limbs: when every bone was bare and the whole town was perambulated, they drove the still living carcass back to the same arena, and threw it on the burning mass in which Margaret had been consumed."</p>
							<p>Farther on he adds:—</p>
							<p>"Divested of all fables which ignorance, prejudice, or open calumny involved it in, Dolcino's scheme amounted to nothing more than a reformation, not of religion, but of the Church; his aim was merely the destruction of the temporal power of the clergy, and he died for his country no less than for his God. The wealth, arrogance, and corruption of the Papal See appeared to him, as it appeared to Dante, as it appeared to a thousand other patriots before and after him, an eternal hindrance to the union, peace, and welfare of Italy, as it was a perpetual check upon the progress of the human race, and a source of infinite scandal to the piety of earnest believers...</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>"To this clear mission of Italian protestantism Dolcino was true throughout. If we bring the light of even the clumsiest criticism to bear on his creed, even such as it has been summed up by the ignorance or malignity of men who never utter his name without an imprecation, we have reason to be astonished at the little we find in it that may be construed into a wilful deviation frum the strictest orthodoxy. Luther and Calvin would equally have repudiated him. He was neither a Presbyterian nor an Episcopalian, but an uncompromising, stanch Papist. His was, most eminently, the heresy of those whom we have designated as * literal Christians.' He would have the Gospel strictly — perhaps blindly — adhered to. Neither was that, in the abstract, an unpardonable offence in the eyes of the Romanism of those times — witness St. Francis and his early flock — provided he had limited himself to make Gospel-law binding upon himself and his followers only. But Dolcino must needs enforce it upon the whole Christian community, enforce it especially on those who set up as teachers of the Gospel, on those who laid claim to Apostolical succession. That was the error that damned him."</p>
							<p>Of Margaret he still farther says, referring to some old manuscript as authority:—</p>
							<p>"She was known by the emphatic appellation of Margaret the Beautiful. It is added, that she was an orphan, heiress of noble parents, and had been placed for her education in a monastery of St. Catherine in Trent; that there Dolcino — who had also been a monk, or at least a novice, in a convent of the Order of the Humiliati, in the same town, and had been expelled in consequence either of his heretic tenets, or of immoral conduct — succeeded nevertheless in becoming domesticated in the nunnery of St. Catherine, as a steward or agent to the nuns, and there accomplished the fascination and abduction of the wealthy heiress."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>59. Val Sesia, among whose mountains Fra Dolcino was taken prisoner, is in the diocese of Novara.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>73. A Bolognese, who stirred up dissensions among the citizens,</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>74. The plain of Lombardy sloping down two hundred miles and more, from Vercelli in Piedmont to Marcabo, a village near Ravenna.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>76. Guido del Cassero and Angiolello da Cagnano, two honorable citizens of Fano, going to Rimini by invitation of Malatestino, were by his order thrown into the sea and drowned, as here prophesied or narrated, near the village of Cattolica on the Adriatic.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>85. Malatestino had lost one eye.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>86. Rimini.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>89. Focara is a headland near Cattolica, famous for dangerous winds, to be preserved from which mariners offered up vows and prayers. These men will not need to do it; they will not reach that cape.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>102. Curio, the banished Tribune, who, fleeing to Cjesar's camp on the Rubicon, urged him to advance upon Rome. Lucan, Pharsalia, I., Rowe's Tr.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"To Caesar's camp the busy Curio fled; Curio, a speaker turbulent and bold, Of venal eloquence, that served for gold, And principles that might be bought and sold. To Casar thus, while thousand cares infest, Revolving round the warrior's anxious breast, His speech the ready orator addressed. 'Haste, then, thy towering eagles on their way; When fair occasion calls, 't is fatal to delay.' "</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>106. Mosca degl' Uberti, or dei Lamberti, who, by advising the murder of Buondelmonte, gave rise to the parties of Guelf and Ghibelline, which so long divided Florence. See Canto X. Note 51.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>134. Bertrand de Born, the turbulent Troubadour of the last half of the twelfth century, was alike skilful with his pen and his sword, and passed his life in alternately singing and fighting, and in stirring up dissension and strife among his neighbors. He is the author of that spirited war-song, well known to all readers of Troubadour verse, beginning</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"The beautiful spring delights me well, When flowers and leaves are growing j And it pleases my heart to hear the swell Of the birds' sweet chorus flowing In the echoing wood; And I love to see, all scattered around. Pavilions and tents on the martial ground; And my spirit finds it good. To see, on the level plains beyond Gay knights and steeds caparison'd "; —</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>and ending with a challenge to Richard Cceur de Lion, telling his minstrel Papiol to go</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"And tell the Lord of Yes and No ' That peace already too long has been."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>"Bertrand de Born," says the old Provencal biography, published by Raynouard, Choix de Poesies Originales des Troubadours, V. 76, " was a chatelain of the bishopric of Perigueux, Viscount of Hautefort, a castle with nearly a thousand retainers. He had a brother, and would have dispossessed him of his inheritance, had it not been for the king of England. He was always at war with all his neighbors, with the Count of Perigueux, and with the Viscount of Limoges, and with his brother Constantine, and with Richard, when he was Count of Poitou. He was a good cavalier, and a good warrior, and a good lover, and a good troubadour; and well informed and well spoken; and knew well how to bear good and evil fortune. Whenever he wished, he was master of King Henry of England and of his son; but always desired that father and son should be at war with each other, and one brother with the other. And he always wished that the king of France and the king of England should be at variance; and if there were either peace or truce, straightway he sought and endeavored by his satires to undo the peace, and to show how each was dishonored by it. And he had great advantages and great misfortunes by thus exciting feuds between them. He wrote many satires, but only two songs. The king of Aragon called the songs of Giraud de Borneil the wives of Bertrand de Born's satires. And he who sang for him bore the name of Papiol. And he was handsome and courteous; and called the Count of Britany, Rassa; and the king of England, Yes and No; and his son, the young king, Marinier. And he set his whole heart on fomenting war; and embroiled the father and son of England, until the young king was killed by an arrow in a castle ot Bertrand de Born.</p>
							<p>"And Bertrand used to boast that he had more wits than he needed. And when the king took him prisoner, he asked him, 'Have you all your wits, for you will need them now? ' And he answered, *I lost them all when the young king died.' Then the king wept, and pardoned him, and gave him robes, and lands, and honors. And he lived long and became a Cistercian monk."</p>
							<p>Fauriel, Histoire de la Poesie Provencale, Adler's Tr., p. 483, quoting part of this passage, adds:—</p>
							<p>"In this notice the old biographer indicates the dominant trait of Bertrand's character very distinctly; it was an unbridled passion for war. He loved it not only as the occasion for exhibiting proofs of valor, for acquiring power, and for winning glory, but also, and even more on account of its hazards, on account of the exaltation of courage and of life which it produced, nay, even for the sake of the tumult, the disorders, and the evils which are accustomed to follow in its train. Bertrand de Born is the ideal of the undisciplined and adventuresome warrior of the Middle Age, rather than that of the chevalier in the proper sense of the term."</p>
							<p>See also Millot, Hist. Litt. des Troubadours, I. 210, and Hist. Litt. de la France par les Bene die tins de St. Maur, continuation, XVH. 425.</p>
							<p>Bertrand de Born, if not the best of the Troubadours, is the most prominent and striking character among them. His life is a drama full of romantic interest; beginning with the old castle in Gascony, " the dames, the cavaliers, the arms, the loves, the courtesy, the bold emprise "; and ending in a Cistercian convent, among friars and fastings and penitence and prayers.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>135. A vast majority of manuscripts and printed editions read in this line. Re Giovanni, King John, instead of Re Giovane, the Young King. Even Boccaccio's copy, which he wrote out with his own hand for Petrarca, has Re Giovanni. Out of seventy-nine Codici examined by Barlow, he says, Study of the Divina Commedia, p. 153, "Only five were found with the correct reading — re giovane The reading re giovane is not found in any of the early editions, nor is it noticed by any of the early commentators." See also Ginguene, Hist. Litt. de PItalie, II. 586, where the subject is elaborately discussed, and the note of Biagioli, who takes the opposite side of the question.</p>
							<p>Henry II. of England had four sons, all of whom were more or less rebellious against him. They were, Henry, surnamed Curt-Mantle, and called by the Troubadours and novelists of his time " The Young King," because he was crowned during his father's life; Richard Coeur-de-Lion, Count of Guienne and Poitou; Geoffroy, Duke of Brittany; and John Lackland. Henry was the only one of these who bore the title of king at the time in question. Bertrand de Born was on terms of intimacy with him, and speaks of him in his poems as lo Reys joves. sometimes lauding, and sometimes reproving him. One of the best of these poems is his Complainte, on the death of Henry, which took place in 1183, from disease, say some accounts, from the bolt of a crossbow say others. He complains that he has lost " the best king that was ever born of mother"; and goes on to say, "King of the courteous, and emperor of the valiant, you would have been Seigneur if you had lived longer; for you bore the name of the Young King, and were the chief and peer of youth. Ay! hauberk and sword, and beautiful buckler, helmet and gonfalon, and purpoint and sark, and joy and love, there is none to maintain them! " See Raynouard, Choix de Poesies, IV. 49.</p>
							<p>In the Bible Guiot de Provins, Barbazan. Fabliaux et Contes, II. 518, he is spoken of as</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Il jones Rois, Li proux, li saiges, li cortois."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>In the Cento Novelle Antiche, XVIIL, XIX., XXXV., he is called // Re Gioz&gt;ane; and in Roger de Wendover's F bluer 5 of History, A, D. 11791^83, " Henry the Young King."</p>
							<p>It was to him that Bertrand de Born " gave the evil counsels," embroiling him with his father and his brothers. Therefore, when the commentators challenge us as Pistol does Shallow, " Under which king, Bezonian? speak or die! " I think we must answer as Shallow does, " Under King Harry."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>137. See 2 Samuel xvii. 1,2:—</p>
							<p>"Moreover, Ahithophel said unto Absalom, let me now choose out twelve thousand men, and I will arise and pursue after David this night. And 1 will come upon him while he is weary and weak-handed, and will make him afraid; and all the people that are with him shall flee; and I will smite the king only."</p>
							<p>Dryden, in his poem oi Absalom and Achitopbel, gives this portrait of the latter:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Of these the false Achitophel was first; A name to all succeeding ages curst; For close designs and crooked counsels fit; Sagacious, bold, and turbulent of wit; Restless, unfix'd in principles and place; In power unpleas'd, impatient of disgrace: A fiery soul, which, working out its way. Fretted the pigmy body to decay, And o'er inform'd the tenement of clay."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>Then he puts into the mouth of Achitophel the following description of Absalom:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Auspicious prince, at whose nativity Some royal planet rul'd the southern sky; Thy longing country's darling and desire; Their cloudy pillar and their guardian fire; Their second Moses, whose extended wand Divides the seas, and shows the promised land; Whose dawning day, in every distant age, Has exercised the sacred prophet's rage; The people's prayer, the glad diviner's theme, The young men's vision, and the old men's dream."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-29">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. The Tenth and last "cloister of Malebolge," where</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Justice infallible Punishes forgers,"</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>and falsifiers of all kinds. This Canto is devoted to the alchemists.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>27. Geri del Bello was a disreputable member of the Alighieri family, and was murdered by one of the Sacchetti. His death was afterwards avenged by his brother, who in turn slew one of the Sacchetti at the door of his house.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>29. Bertrand de Born.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>35. Like the ghost of Ajax in the Odyssey, XI. " He answered me not at all, but went to Erebus amongst the other souls of the dead."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>36. Dante seems to share the feeling of the Italian vendetta, which required retaliation from some member of the injured family.</p>
							<p>"Among the Italians of this age," says Napier, Florentine Hist., I. Ch.VIL, "and for centuries after, private offence was never forgotten until revenged, and generally involved a succession of mutual injuries; vengeance was not only considered lawful and just, but a positive duty, dishonorable to omit; and, as may be learned from ancient private journals, it was sometimes allowed to sleep for five-and-thirty years, and then suddenly struck a victim who perhaps had not yet seen the light when the original injury was inflicted."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>46. The Val di Chiana, near Arezzo, was in Dante's time marshy and pestilential. Now, by the effect of drainage, it is one of the most beautiful and fruitful of the Tuscan valleys. The Maremma was and is notoriously unhealthy; see Canto XIII. Note 9, and Sardinia would seem to have shared its ill repute.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>57. Forgers or falsifiers in a general sense. The " false semblaunt " of Gower, Confes. Amant., II.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Offals semblaunt if I shall telle, Above all other it is the welle Out of the which deceipte floweth."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>They are registered here on earth to be punished hereafter.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>59. The plague of Aegina is described by Ovid, Metamorph. VIL, Stonestreet's Tr.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Their black dry tongues are swelled, and scarce can move, And short thick sighs from panting lungs are drove. They gape for air, with flatt'ring hopes t' abate Their raging flames, but that augments their heat. No bed, no cov'ring can the wretches bear, But on the ground, exposed to open air, They lie, and hope to find a pleasing coolness there. The sufF'ring earth, with that oppression curst. Returns the heat which they imparted first, " Here one, with fainting steps, does slowly creep O'er heaps of dead, and straight augments the heap; Another, while his strength and tongue prevailed. Bewails his friend, and falls himself bewailed; This with imploring looks surveys the skies, The last dear office of his closing eyes, But finds the Heav'ns implacable, and dies."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>The birth of the Myrmidons, "who still retain the thrift of ants, though now transformed to men," is thus given in the same book:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"As many ants the num'rous branches bear. The same their labor, and their frugal care j The branches too alike commotion found, And shook th' industrious creatures on the ground, Who by degrees (what 's scarce to be believed) A nobler form and larger bulk received, And on the earth walked an unusual pace, With manly strides, and an erected face; Their num'rous legs, and former color lost. The insects could a human figure boast."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>88. Latian, or Italian; any one of the Latin race.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>109. The speaker is a certain Griffolino, an alchemist of Arezzo, who practised upon the credulity of Albert, a natural son of the Bishop of Siena. For this he was burned; but was " condemned to the last Bolgia of the ten for alchemy."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>116. The inventor of the Cretan labyrinth. Ovid, Metamorph. VHI.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Great Daedalus of Athens was the man Who made the draught, and formed the wondrous plan."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>Not being able to find his way out of the labyrinth, he made wings for himself and his son Icarus, and escaped by flight.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>122. Speaking of the people of Siena, Forsyth, Italy, 532, says: " Vain, flighty, fanciful, they want the judgment and penetration of their Florentine neighbors; who, nationally severe, call a nail without a head chiodo Sanese. The accomplished Signora Rinieri told me, that her father, while Governor of Siena, was once stopped in his carriage by a crowd at Florence, where the mob, recognizing him, called out: ' Lasciate passare il Governatore de" mattiJ' A native of Siena is presently known at Florence; for his very walk, being formed to a hilly town, detects him on the plain."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>125. The persons here mentioned gain a kind of immortality from Dante's verse. The Stricca, or Baldastricca, was a lawyer of Siena; and Niccolb dei Salimbeni, or Bonsignori, introduced the fashion of stuffing pheasants with cloves, or, as Benvenuto says, of roasting them at a fire of cloves. Though Dante mentions them apart, they seem, like the two others named afterwards, to have been members of the Brigtita Spendereccia, or Prodigal Club, of Siena, whose extravagances are recorded by Benvenuto da Imola. This club consisted of " twelve very rich young gentlemen, who took it into their heads to do things that would make a great part of the world wonder." Accordingly each contributed eighteen thousand golden florins to a common fund, amounting in all to two hundred and sixteen thousand florins. They built a palace, in which each member had a splendid chamber, and they gave sumptuous dinners and suppers; ending their banquets sometimes by throwing all the dishes, table-ornaments, and knives of gold and silver out of the window. " This silly institution," continues Benvenuto, " lasted only ten months, the treasury being exhausted, and the wretched members became the fable and laughing-stock of all the world."</p>
							<p>In honor of this club, Folgore da San Geminiano, a clever poet of the day (1260), wrote a series of twelve convivial sonnets, one for each month of the year, with Dedication and Conclusion. A translation of these sonnets may be found in D. G. Rossetti's Early Italian Poets. The Dedication runs as follows:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Unto the blithe and lordly Fellowship, (I know not where, but wheresoe'er, I know, Lordly and blithe,) be greeting; and thereto, Dogs, hawks, and a full purse wherein to dip; Quails struck i' the flight; nags mettled to the whip; Hart-hounds, hare-hounds, and blood-hounds even so; And o'er that realm, a crown for Niccolb, Whose praise in Siena springs from lip to lip. Tingoccio, Atuin di Togno, and Ancaian, Bartolo, and Mugaro, and Faenot, Who well might pass for children of King Ban, Courteous and valiant more than Lancelot, — To each, God speed! How worthy every man To hold high tournament in Camelot."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>136. "This Capocchio," says the Ottimo, " was a very subtle alchemist; and because he was burned for practising alchemy in Siena, he exhibits his hatred to the Sienese, and gives us to understand that the author knew him."</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-30">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXX</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. In this Canto the same Bolgia is continued, with different kinds of Falsifiers.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>4. Athamas, king of Thebes and husband of Ino, daughter of Cadmus. His madness is thus described by Ovid, Metamorph. IV., Eusden's Tr.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Now Athamas cries out, his reason fled, ' Here, fellow-hunters, let the toils be spread. I saw a lioness, in quest of food, With her two young, run roaring in this wood.' Again the fancied savages were seen, As thro' his palace still he chased his queen; Then tore Learihus from her breast: the child Stretched little arms, and on its father smiled, — A father now no more, — who now begun Around his head to whirl his giddy son, And, quite insensible to nature's call, The helpless infant flung against the wall. The same mad poison in the mother wrought; Young Melicerta in her arms she caught, And with disordered tresses, howling, flies, ' O Bacchus, Evoe, Bacchus! ' loud she cries. The name of Bacchus Juno laughed to hear, And said, ' Thy foster-god has cost thee dear.' A rock there stood, whose side the beating waves Had long consumed, and hollowed into caves. The head shot forwards in a bending steep, And cast a dreadful covert o'er the deep. The wretched Ino, on destruction bent, Climbed up the cliff, — such strength her fury lent: Thence with her guiltless boy, who wept in vain, At one bold spring she plunged into the main."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>16. Hecuba, wife of Priam of Troy, and mother of Polyxena and Polydorus. Ovid, XIII., Stanyan's Tr.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"When on the banks her son in ghastly hue Transfixed with Thracian arrows strikes her view, The matrons shrieked} her big swoln grief surpassed The power of utterance; she stood aghast; She had nor speech, nor tears to give relief: Excess of woe suppressed the rising grief. Lifeless as stone, on earth she fix'd her eyes; And then look'd up to Heav'n with wild surprise, Now she contemplates o'er with sad delight Her son's pale visage; then her aking sight Dwells on his wounds: she varies thus by turns, Till with collected rage at length she burns. Wild as the mother-lion, when among The haunts of prey she seeks her ravished young: Swift flies the ravisher; she marks his trace, And by the print directs her anxious chase. So Hecuba with mingled grief and rage Pursues the king, regardless of her age. Fastens her forky fingers in Jiis eyes; Tears out the rooted balls; her rage pursues. And in the hollow orbs her hand imbrues. " The Thracians, fired at this inhuman scene, With darts and stones assail the frantic queen. She snarls and growls, nor in an human tone; Then bites impatient at the bounding stone; Extends her jaws, as she her voice would raise To keen invectives in her wonted phrase; But barks, and thence the yelping brute betrays."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>31. GrifFolino d'Arezzo, mentioned in Canto XXIX. 109.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>42. The same "mad sprite," Gianni Schicchi, mentioned in line 32. " Buoso Donati of Florence," says Benvenuto, " although a nobleman and of -an illustrious house, was nevertheless like other noblemen of his time, and by means of thefts had greatly increased his patrimony. When the hour of death drew near, the sting of conscience caused him to make a will in which he gave fat legacies to many people; whereupon his son Simon, (the Ottimo says his nephew,) thinking himself enormously aggrieved, suborned Vanni Schicchi dei Cavalcanti, who got into Buoso's bed, and made a will in opposition to the other. Gianni much resembled Buoso." In this will Gianni Schicchi did not forget himself, while making Simon heir; for, according to the Ottimo, he put this clause into it: "To Gianni Schicchi I bequeath my mare." This was the "lady of the herd," and Benvenuto adds, " none more beautiful was to be found in Tuscany; and it was valued at a thousand florins."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>61. Messer Adamo, a false-coiner of Brescia, who at the instigation of the Counts Guido, Alessandro, and Aghinolfo of Romena, counterfeited* the golden florin of Florence, which bore on one side a lily, and on the other the figure of John the Baptist.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>64. Tasso, Gcrusalcmmc, XIII. 60, Fairfax's Tr.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"He that the gliding rivers erst had seen Adown their verdant channels gently rolled, Or filling streams, which to the valleys green, Distilled from tops of Alpine mountains cold, Those he desired in vain, new torments been Augmented thus with wish of comforts old; Those waters cool he drank in vain conceit, Which more increased his thirst, increased his heat."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>65. The upper valley of the Arno is in the province of Cassentino. Quoting these three lines. Ampere, Voyage Dantesque, 246, says: " In these untranslatable verses, there is a feeling of humid freshness, which almost makes one shudder. I owe it to truth to say, that the Cassentine was a great deal less fresh and less verdant in reality than in the poetry of Dante, and that in the midst of the aridity which surrounded me, this poetry, by its very perfection, made one feel something of the punishment of Master Adam."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>73. Forsyth, Italy, 116, says: "The castle of Romena, mentioned in these verses, now stands in ruins on a precipice about a mile from our inn, and not far off is a spring which the peasants call Fonte Branda. Might I presume to differ from his commentators, Dante, in my opinion, does not mean the great fountain of Siena, but rather this obscure spring; which, though less known to the world, was an object more familiar to the poet himself, who took refuge here from proscription, and an image more natural to the coiner who was burnt on the spot."</p>
							<p>Ampere is of the same opinion, Voyage Dantesque, 246: " The Fonte Branda, mentioned by Master Adam, is assuredly the fountain thus named, which still flows not far from the tower of Romena, between the place of the crime and that of its punishment."</p>
							<p>On the other hand, Mr. Barlow, Contributions, remarks: " This little fount was known only to so few, that Dante, who wrote for the Italian people generally,, can scarcely be thought to have meant this, when the famous Fonte Branda at Siena was, at least by name, familiar to them all, and formed an image more in character with the insatiable thirst of Master Adam."</p>
							<p>Poetically the question is of slight importance; for, as Fluellen says, " There is a river in Macedon, and there is also moreover a river at Monmouth,....and there is salmons in both."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>86. This line and line 1 1 of Canto XXIX. are cited by Gabrielle Rossetti in confirmation of his theory of the " Principal Allegory of the Inferno," that the city of Dis is Rome. He says, Spirito Antipapale, I. 62, Miss Ward's Tr.:—</p>
							<p>"This well is surrounded by a high wall, and the wall by a vast trench; the circuit of the trench is twenty-two miles, and that of the wall eleven miles. Now the outward trench of the walls of Rome (u'hether real or imaginary we say not) was reckoned by Dante's contemporaries to be exactly twenty-two miles; and the walls of the city were then, and still are, eleven miles round. Hence it is clear, that the wicked time which looks into Rome, as into a mirror, sees there the corrupt place which is the final goal to its waters or people, that is, the figurative Rome, * dread seat of Dis.'"</p>
							<p>The trench here spoken of is the last trench of Malebolge. Dante mentions no wall about the well; only giants standing round it like towers.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>97. Potiphar's wife.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>98. Virgil's " perjured Sinon," the Greek who persuaded the Trojans to accept the wooden horse, telling them it was meant to protect the city, in lieu of the statue of Pallas, stolen by Diomed and Ulysses.</p>
							<p>Chaucer, Nonnes Preestes Tale:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"O false dissimilour, O Greek Sinon, That broughtest Troye at utterly to sorwe."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>103. The disease of tympanites is so called " because the abdomen is distended with wind, and sounds like a drum when struck."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>128. Ovid, Metamorph. III.:—</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"A fountain in a darksome wood, Nor stained with falling leaves nor rising mud."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-31">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. This Canto describes the Plain of the Giants, between Malebolge and the mouth of the Infernal Pit.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>4. Iliad, XVI.: "A Pelion ash, which Chiron gave to his (Achilles') father, cut from the top of Mount Pelion, to be the death of heroes."</p>
							<p>Chaucer, Squieres Tale:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"And of Achilles for his queinte spere, For he coude with it bothe hele and drere."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>And Shakespeare, in King Henry the Sixth, V. i.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Whose smile and frown, like to Achilles' spear, Is able with the change to kill and cure."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>16. The battle of Roncesvalles,</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"When Charlemain with all his peerage fell By Fontarabia."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>18. Archbishop Turpin, Chronicle, XXIIL, Rodd's Tr., thus describes the blowing of Orlando's horn:—</p>
							<p>"He now blew a loud blast with his horn, to summon any Christian concealed in the adjacent woods to his assistance, or to recall his friends beyond the pass. This horn was endued with such power, that all other horns were split by its sound; and it is said that Orlando at that time blew it with such vehemence, that he burst the veins and nerves of his neck. The sound reached the king's ears, who lay encamped in the valley still called by his name, about eight miles from Ronceval, towards Gascony, being carried so far by supernatural power. Charles would have flown to his succor, but was prevented by Ganalon, who, conscious of Orlando's sufferings, insinuated it was usual with him to sound his horn on light occasions. ' He is, perhaps,' said he, * pursuing some wild beast, and the sound echoes through the woods; it will be fruitless, therefore, to seek him.' O wicked traitor, deceitful as Judas! What dost thou merit?"</p>
							<p>Walter Scott in Marmion, VI. 33, makes allusion to Orlando's horn:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"O for a blast of that drcaJ horn, On Fontarabian echoes borne, That to King Charles did come, When Rowland brave, and Olivier, And every paladin and peer, On Roncesvalles died!"</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>Orlando's horn is one of the favorite fictions of old romance, and is surpassed in power only by that of Alexander, which took sixty men to blow it and could be heard at a distance of sixty miles!</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>41. Montereggione is a picturesque old castle on an eminence near Siena. Ampere, Voyage D antes que, 251, remarks: " This fortress, as the commentators say, was furnished with towers all round about, and had none in the centre. In its present state it is still very faithfully described by the verse,</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>'Montereggion di torri si corona.'"</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>59. This pine-cone of bronze, which is now in the gardens of the Vatican, was found in the mausoleum of Hadrian, and is supposed to have crowned its summit. " I have looked daily," says Mrs. Kemble, Tear of Consolation, 152, " over the lonely, sunny gardens, open like the palace halls to me, where the wide-sweeping orange-walks end in some distant view of the sad and noble Campagna, where silver fountains call to each other through the silent, overarching cloisters of dark and fragrant green, and where the huge bronze pine, by which Dante measured his great giant, yet stands in the midst of graceful vases and bass-reliefs wrought in former ages, and the more graceful blossoms blown within the very hour."</p>
							<p>And Ampere, Voyage Dantesque, 277, remarks: "Here Dante takes as a point of comparison an object of determinate size; the pigna is eleven feet high, the giant then must be seventy; it performs, in the description, the office of those figures which are placed near monuments to render it easier for the eye to measure their height."</p>
							<p>Mr. Norton, Travel and Study in Italy, 253, thus speaks of the same object:—</p>
							<p>"This pine-cone, of bronze, was set originally upon the summit of the Mausoleum of Hadrian. After this imperial sepulchre had undergone many evil fates, and as its ornaments were stripped one by one from it, the cone was in the sixth century taken down, and carried off to adorn a fountain, which had been constructed for the use of dusty and thirsty pilgrims, in a pillared enclosure, called the Paradiso, in front of the old basilica of St. Peter. Here it remained for centuries; and when the old church gave way to the new, it was put where it now stands, useless and out of place, in the trim and formal gardens of the Papal palace."</p>
							<p>And adds in a note:—</p>
							<p>"At the present day it serves the bronze-workers of Rome as a model for an inkstand, such as is seen in the shop-windows every winter, and is sold to travellers, few of whom know the history and the poetry belonging to its original."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>67. "The gaping monotony of this jargon," says Leigh Hunt, *' fiill of the vowel a, is admirably suited to the mouth of the vast half-stupid speaker. It is like a babble of the gigantic infancy of the world."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>77. Nimrod, the " mighty hunter before the Lord," who built the tower of Babel, which, according to the Italian popular tradition, was so high that whoever mounted to the top of it could hear the angels sing.</p>
							<p>Cory, Ancient Fragments, 51, gives this extract from the Sibylline Oracles:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"But wlicn the judgments of the Almighty God Were ripe for execution; when the Tower Rose to the skies upon Assyria's plain, And all mankind one language only knew; A dread commission from on high was given To the fell whirlwinds, which with dire alarms Beat on the Tower, and to its lowest base Shook it convulsed. And now all intercourse, By some occult and overruling power. Ceased among men: by utterance they strove Perplexed and anxious to disclose their mind; But their lip failed them, and in lieu of words Produced a painful babbling sound: the place Was tiience called Babel; by th' apostate crew Named from the event. Then severed far away They sped uncertain into realms unknown; Thus kingdoms rose, and the glad world was filled."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>94. Odyssey, XI., Buckley's Tr.: "God-like Otus and far-fanicd Ephialtes; whom the faithful earth nourished, the tallest and far the most beautiful, at least after illustrious Orion. For at nine years old they were also nine cubits in width, and in height they were nine fathoms. Who even threatened the immortals that thev would set up a strife of impetuous war in Olympus. They attempted to place Ossa upon Olympus, and upon Ossa leafy Pelion, that heaven might be accessible. And they would have accomplished it, if they had reached the measure of youth; but the son of Jove, whom fair-haired Latona bore, destroyed them both, before the down flowered under their temples and thickened upon their cheeks with a flowering beard."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>98. The giant with a hundred hands. ^ncid, X.: "^ga;on, who, they say, had a hundred arms and a hundred hands, and flashed fire from fifty mouths and breasts; when against the thunderbolts of Jove he on so many equal bucklers clashed; unsheathed so many swords."</p>
							<p>He is supposed to have been a famous pirate, and the fable of the hundred hands arose from the hundred sailors that manned his ship.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>100. The giant Antasus is here unbound, because he had not been at "the mighty war " against the gods.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>115. The valley of the Bagrada, one of whose branches flows bv Zama, the scene of Scipio's great victory over Hannibal, by which he gained his greatest renown and his title of Africanus.</p>
							<p>Among the neighboring hills, according to Lucan, Pharsalia, IV., the giant Anta'us had his cave. Speaking of Curio's voyage, he says:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"To Afric's coast he cuts the foamy way, Where low the once victorious Carthage lay. There landing, to the well-known camp he hies, Where from afar the distant seas he spies; Where Bagrada's dull waves the sands divide, And slowly downward roll their sluggish tide. From thence he seeks the heights renowned by fame, And hallowed by the great Cornelian name: The rocks and hills which long, traditions say, "Were held by huge Antaeus' horrid sway. But greater deeds this rising mountain grace, And Scipio's name ennobles much the place, While, fixing here his famous camp, he calls Fierce Hannibal from Rome's devoted walls. As yet the mouldering works remain in view. Where dreadful once the Latian eagles flew."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>124. ^neid, VI.: " Here too you might have seen Tityus, the fosterchild of all-bearing earth, whose body is extended over nine whole acres; and a huge vulture, with her hooked beak, pecking at his immortal liver." Also Odyssey, XI., in similar words.</p>
							<p>Typhoeus was a giant with a hundred heads, like a dragon's, who made war upon the gods as soon as he was born. He was the father of Geryon and Cerberus.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>132. The battle between Hercules and Antaeus is described by Lucan, Pharsalia, IV.:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Bright in Olympic oil Alcides shone, Antasus with his mother's dust is strown, And seeks her friendly force to aid his own."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>136. One of the leaning towers of Bologna, which Eustace, Classical Tour, I. 167, thinks are " remarkable only for their unmeaning elevation and dangerous deviation from the perpendicular."</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-32">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXII</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. In this Canto begins the Ninth and last Circle of the Inferno, where Traitors are punished.</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Hence in the smallest circle, at the point Of all the Universe, where Dis is seated. Whoe'er betrays forever is consumed."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>3. The word thrust is here used in its architectural sense, as the thrust of a bridge against its abutments, and the like.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>9. Still using the babble of childhood.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>11. The Muses; the poetic tradition being that Amphion built the walls of Thebes by the sound of his lyre; and the prosaic interpretation, that he did it by his persuasive eloquence.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>15. Matthew xxvi. 24: "Woeunto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! it had been good for that man if he had not been born."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>28. Tambernich is a mountain of Sclavonia, and Pietrapana another near Lucca.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>55. These two "miserable brothers " are Alessandro and Napoleone, sons of Alberto degli Alberti, lord of Falterona in the valley of the Bisenzio. After their father's death they quarrelied, and one treacherously slew the other.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>58. Caina is the first of the four divisions of this Circle, and takes its name from the first fratricide.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>62. Sir Mordred, son of King Arthur. See La Mort cPJrthure, III. ch. 167: "And there King Arthur smote Sir Mordred under the shield with a foine of his speare throughout the body more than a fadom."</p>
							<p>Nothing is said here of the sun's shining through the wound, so as to break the shadow on the ground, but that incident is mentioned in the Italian version of the Romance of Launcelot of the Lake, U illustre e famosa tstoria di Lancillotto del Lago, III. ch. 162: " Behind the opening made by the lance there passed through the wound a ray of the sun so manifestly, that Girflet saw.it."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>63. Focaccia was one of the Cancellieri Bianchi, of Pistoia, and was engaged in the affair of cutting off the hand of his half-brother. See Note 65, Canto VI. He is said also to have killed his uncle.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>65. Sassol Mascheroni, according to Benvenuto, was one of the Toschi family of Florence. He murdered his nephew in order to get possession of his property; for which crime he was carried through the streets of Florence nailed up in a cask, and then beheaded.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>68. Camicion de' Pazzi of V^aldarno, who murdered his kinsman Ubcrtino. But his crime will seem small and excusable when compared with that of another kinsman, Carlino de' Pazzi, who treacherously surrendered the castle of Piano in Valdarno, wherein many Florentine exiles were taken and put to death.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>81. The speaker is Bocca degli Abati, whose treason caused the defeat of the Guelfs at the famous battle of Montaperti in 1260. See Note 86, Canto X.</p>
							<p>"Messer Bocca degli Abati, the traitor," says Malispini, Storia, ch. 171, " with his sword in hand, smote and cut off the hand of Messer Jacopo de' Pazzi of Florence, who bore the standard of the cavalry of the Commune of Florence. And the knights and the people, seeing the standard down, and the treachery, were put to rout."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>88. The second division of the Circle, called Antenora, from Antenor, the Trojan prince, who betrayed his country by keeping up a secret correspondence with the Greeks. Virgil, jEncid, I. 242, makes him founder of Padua.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>106. See Note 81 of this Canto.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>116. Buoso da Duera of Cremona, being bribed, suffered the French cavalry under Guido da Monforte to pass through Lombardy on their way to Apulia, without opposing them as he had been commanded.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>117. There is a double meaning in the Italian expression sta fresco, which is well rendered by the vulgarism, lift out in the cold, so familiar in American politics.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>119. Bcccaria of Pavia, Abbot of Vallombrosa, and Papal Legate at Florence, where he was beheaded in 1258 for plotting against the Guelfs.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>121. Gianni de' Soldanieri, of Florence, a Ghibelline, who betrayed his party. Villani, VII. 14, says: " Messer Gianni de' Soldanieri put himself at the head of the populace from motives of ambition, regardless of consequences which were injurious to the Ghibelline party, and to his own detriment, which seems always to have been the case in Florence with those who became popular leaders."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>122. The traitor Ganellon, or Ganalon, who betrayed the Christian cause at Roncesvalles, persuading Charlemagne not to go to the assistance of Orlando. See Canto XXXI. Note 18.</p>
							<p>Tebaldello de' Manfredi treacherously opened the gates of Faenza to the French in the night.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>130. Tydeus, son of the king of Calydon, slew Menalippus at the siege of Thebes and was himself mortally wounded. Statius, Thebaid, VIII., thus describes what followed:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"O'ercome with joy and anger, Tydeus tries To raise himself, and meets with eager eyes The deathful object, pleased as he surveyed His own condition in his foe's portrayed. The severed head impatient he demands, And grasps with fervor in his trembling hands, While he remarks the restless balls of sight That sought and shunned alternately the light. Contented now, his wrath began to cease. And the fierce warrior had expired in peace; But the fell fiend a thought of vengeance bred, Unworthy of himself and of the dead. Meanwhile, her sire unmoved, Tritonia came, To crown her hero with immortal fame; But when she saw his jaws besprinkled o'er With spattered brains, and tinged with living gore. Whilst his imploring friends attempt in vain To calm his fury, and his rage restrain, Again, recoiling from the loathsome view, The sculptur'd target o'er her face she threw."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-33">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIII</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. In this Canto the subject of the preceding is continued.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>13. Count Ugolino della Gherardesca was Podesta of Pisa. " Raised to the highest offices of the republic for ten years," says Napier, Florentine History, I. 318, "he would soon have become absolute, had not his own nephew, Nino Visconte, Judge of Gallura, contested this supremacy and forced himself into conjoint and equal authority; this could not continue, and a sort of compromise was for the moment effected, by which Visconte retired to the absolute government of Sardinia. But Ugolino, still dissatisfied, sent his son to disturb the island; a deadly feud was the consequence, Guelph against Guelph, while the latent spirit of Ghibellinism, which filled the breasts of the citizens and was encouraged by priest and friar, felt its advantage; the Archbishop Ruggiero Rubaldino was its real head, but he worked with hidden caution as the apparent friend of either chieftain. In 1287, after some sharp contests, both of them abdicated, for the sake, as it was alleged, of public tranquillity; but, soon perceiving their error, again united, and, scouring the streets with all their followers, forcibly re-established their authority. Ruggieri seemed to assent quietly to this new outrage, even looked without emotion on the bloody corpse of his favorite nephew, who had been stabbed by Ugolino; and so deep was his dissimulation, that he not only refused to believe the murdered body to be his kinsman's, but zealously assisted the Count to establish himself alone in the government, and accomplish Visconte's ruin. The design was successful; Nino was overcome and driven from the town, and in 1288 Ugolino entered Pisa in triumph from his villa, where he had retired to await the catastrophe. The Archbishop had neglected nothing, and Ugolino found himself associated with this prelate in the public government; events now began to thicken; the Count could not brook a competitor, much less a Ghibelline priest: in the month of July both parties flew to arms, and the Archbishop was victorious. After a feeble attempt to rally in the public palace. Count Ugolino, his two sons, Uguccione and Gaddo, and two young grandsons, Anselmuccio and Brigata, surrendered at discretion, and were immediately imprisoned in a tower, afterwards called the Torre del/a fame, and there perished by starvation. Count Ugolino della Gherardesca, whose tragic story after five hundred years stHl sounds in awful numbers from the lyre of Dante, was stained with the ambition and darker vices of the age; like other potent chiefs, he sought to enslave his country, and checked at nothing in his impetuous career; he was accused of many crimes; of poisoning his own nephew, of failing in war, making a disgraceful peace, of flying shamefully, perhaps traitorously, at Meloria, and of obstructing all negotiations with Genoa for the return of his imprisoned countrymen. Like most others of his rank in those frenzied times he belonged more to faction than his country, and made the former subservient to his own ambition; but all these accusations, even if well founded, would not draw him from the general standard; they would only prove that he shared the ambition, the cruelty, the ferocity, the recklessness of human life and suffering, and the relentless pursuit of power in common with other chieftains of his age and country. Ugolino was overcome, and suffered a cruel death; his family was dispersed, and his memory has perhaps been blackened with a darker coloring to excuse the severity of his punishment; but his sons, who naturally followed their parent's fortune, were scarcely implicated in his crimes, although they shared his fate; and his grandsons, though not children, were still less guilty, though one of these was not unstained with blood. The Archbishop had public and private wrongs to revenge, and had he fallen, his sacred character alone would probably have procured for him a milder destiny."</p>
							<p>Villani, VII. 128, gives this account of the imprisonment:—</p>
							<p>"The Pisans, who had imprisoned Count Ugolino and his two sons and two grandsons, children of Count Guelfo, as we have before mentioned, in a tower on the Piazza degli Anziani, ordered the door of the tower to be locked, and the keys to be thrown into the Arno, and forbade any food should be given to the prisoners, who in a few days died of hunger. And the five dead bodies, being taken together out of the tower, were ignominiously buried; and from that day forth the tower was called the Tower of Famine, and shall be forever more. For this cruelty the Pisans were much blamed through all the world where it was known; not so much for the Count's sake, as on account of his crimes and treasons he perhaps deserved such a death, but for the sake of his children and grandchildren, who were young and innocent boys; and this sin, committed by the Pisans, did not remain unpunished."</p>
							<p>Chaucer's version of the story in the Menkes Tale is as follows:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Of the erl Hugelin of Pise the langour Ther may no tonge tellen for pitee. But litel out of Pise stant a tour, In whiche tour in prison yput was he, And with him ben his litel children three, The eldest scarsely five yere was of age: Alas! fortune, it was gret crueltee Swiche briddes for to put in swiche a cage.</p>
								<p>Dampned was he to die in that prison, For Roger, which that bishop of Pise, Had on him made a false suggestion, Thurgh which the pcplc gan upon him rise, And put him in prison, in sWiche a wise, As ye han herd; and mete and drinke he had So smale, that wel unnethe it may suffise, And thervv-ithal it was ful poure and bad.</p>
								<p>And on a day befell, that in that houre. Whan that his mete wont was to be brought, The gailer shette the dores of the toure; He hered it wel, but he spake right nought. And in his herte anon ther fell a thought, That they for hunger wolden do him dien; Alas! quod he, alas that I was wrought! Therwith the teres fellen fro his eyen.</p>
								<p>His yonge sone, that three yere was of age, Unto him said, fader, why do ye wepe? Whan will the gailer bringen our potage? Is ther no morsel bred that ye do kepe? I am so hungry, that I may not slepe. Now wolde God that I might slepen ever, Than shuld not hunger in my wombe crepe; Ther n'is no thing, sauf bred, that me were lever.</p>
								<p>Thus day by day this childe began to crie. Til in his fadres barme adoun it lay. And saide, farewelj fader, I mote die; And kist his fader, and dide the same day. And whan the woful fader did it sey. For wo his armes two he gan to bite. And saide, alas! fortune, and wala wa! Thy false whele my wo all may I wite.</p>
								<p>His children wenden, that for hunger it was That he his armes gnowe, and not for wo. And sayden: fader, do not so, alas! But rather ete the flesh upon us two. Our flesh thou yaf us, take our flesh us fro, And ete ynough: right thus they to him seide. And after that, within a day or two, They laide hem in his lappe adoun, and deide.</p>
								<p>Himself dispeired eke for hunger starf. Thus ended is this mighty Erl of Pise: From high estat fortune away him carf. Of this tragedie it ought ynough suffice; Who so wol here it in a longer wise, Redeth the grete poete of Itaille, That highte Dante, for he can it devise Fro point to point, not o word wol he faille."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>Buti, Commento says: "After eight days they were removed from prison and carried wrapped in matting to the church of the Minor Friars at San Francesco, and buried in the monument, which is on the side of the steps leading into the church near the gate of the cloister, with irons on their legs, which irons I myself saw taken out of the monument."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>22. The remains of this tower," says Napier, Florentine History, I. 319, note, " still exist in the Piazza de' Cavalieri, on the right of the archway as the spectator looks toward the clock." According to Buti it was called the Mew, " because the eagles of the Commune were kept there to moult."</p>
							<p>Shelley thus sings of it. Poems, III. 91:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Amid the desolation of a city. Which was the cradle, and is now the grave Of an extinguished people, so that pity Weeps o'er the shipwrecks of oblivion's wave. There stands the Tower of Famine. It is built Upon some prison-homes, whose dwellers rave For bread, and gold, and blood: pain, linked to guilt, Agitates the light flame of their hours, Until its vital oil is spent or spilt; There stands the pile, a tower amid the towers And sacred domes; each marble-ribbed roof. The brazen-gated temples, and the bowers Of solitary wealth! The tempest-proof Pavilions of the dark Italian air Are by its presence dimmed, — they stand aloof, And are withdrawn, — so that the world is bare, As if a spectre, wrapt in shapeless terror. Amid a company of ladies fair Should glide and glow, till it became a mirror Of all their beauty, and their hair and hue, The life of their sweet eyes, with all its error, Should be absorbed till they to marble grew."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>30. Monte San Giuliano, between Pisa and Lucca.</p>
							<p>Shelley, Poems, III. 166:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"It was that hill whose intervening brow Screens Lucca from the Pisan's envious eye. Which the circumfluous plain waving below. Like a wide lake of green fertility, With streams and fields and marshes bare, Divides from the far Apennine, which lie Islanded in the immeasurable air."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>31. The hounds are the Pisan mob; the hunters, the Pisan noblemen here mentioned; the wolf and whelps, Ugolino and his sons.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>46. It is a question whether in this line chiavar is to be rendered nailed up or locked. Villani and Bcnvenuto say the tower was locked, and the keys thrown into the Arno; and I believe most of the commentators interpret the line in this way. But the locking of a prison door, which must have been a daily occurrence, could hardly have caused the dismay here portrayed, unless it can be shown that the lower door of the tower was usually left unlocked.</p>
							<p>"The thirty lines from Ed to sentC are unequalled," says Landor, Pentameron, 40, " by any other continuous thirty in the whole dominions of poetry."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>80. Italy; it being an old custom to call countries by the affirmative particle of the language.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>82. Capraia and Gorgona are two islands opposite the mouth of the Arno. Ampere, Voyage Dantesque, 217, remarks: "This imagination may appear grotesque and forced if one looks at the map, for the isle of Gorgona is at some distance from the mouth of the Arno, and I had always thought so, until the day when, having ascended the tower of Pisa, I was struck with the aspect which the Gorgona presented from that point. It seemed to shut up the Arno. I then understood how Dante might naturally have had this idea, which had seemed strange to me, and his imagination was justified in my eyes. He had not seen the Gorgona from the Leaning Tower, which did not exist in his time, but from some one of the numerous towers which protected the ramparts of Pisa. This fact alone would be sufficient to show what an excellent interpretation of a poet travelling is."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>86. Napier, Florentine History, I. 313: *' He without hesitation surrendered Santa Maria a Monte, Fuccechio, Santa Croce, and Monte Calvole to Florence; exiled the most zealous Ghibellines from Pisa, and reduced it to a purely Guelphic republic; he was accused of treachery, and certainly his own objects were admirably forwarded by the continued captivity of so many of his countrymen, by the banishment of the adverse faction, and by the friendship and support of Florence."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>87. Thebes was renowned for its misfortunes and grim tragedies, from the days of the sowing of the dragon's teeth by Cadmus, down to the destruction of the city by Alexander, who commanded it to be utterly demolished, excepting only the house in which the poet Pindar was born. Moreover, the tradition runs that Pisa was founded by Pelops, son of King Tantalus of Thebes, although it derived its name from " the Olympic Pisa on the banks of the Alpheus."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>118. Friar Alberigo, of the family of the Manfredi, Lords of Faenza, was one of the Frati Gaudenti, or Jovial Friars, mentioned in Canto XXIII. 103. The account which the Ottimo gives of his treason is as follows: " Having made peace with certain hostile fellow-citizens, he betrayed them in this wise. One evening he invited them to supper, and had armed retainers in the chambers round the supper-room. It was in summer-time, and he gave orders to his servants that, when after the meats he should order the fruit, the chambers should be opened, and the armed men should come forth and should murder alb the guests. And so it was done. And he did the like the year before at Castello delle Mura at Pistoia. These are the fruits of the Garden of Treason, of which he speaks." Benvenuto says that his guests were his brother Manfred and his (Manfred's) son. Other commentators say they were certain members of the Order of Frati Gaudenti. In 1 300, the date of the poem, Alberigo was still living,</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>120. A Rowland for an Oliver.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>124. This division of Cocytus, the Lake of Lamentation, is called Ptolom^ea from Ptolomeus, i Maccabees xvi. 1 1, where " the captain of Jericho inviteth Simon and two of his sons into his castle, and there treacherously murdereth them "; for "when Simon and his sons had drunk largely, Ptolomee and his men rose up, and took their weapons, and came upon Simon into the banqueting-place, and slew him, and his two sons, and certain of his servants."</p>
							<p>Or perhaps from Ptolemy, who murdered Pompey after the battle of Pharsalia.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>126. Of the three Fates, Clotho held the distaff, Lachesis spun the thread, and Atropos cut it.</p>
							<p>Odyssey, XL: " After him I perceived the might of Hercules, an image; for he himself amongst the immortal gods is delighted with banquets, and has the fair-legged Hebe, daughter of mighty Jove, and golden-sandalled Juno,"</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>137. Ser Branco d' Oria was a Genoese, and a member of the celebrated Doria family of that city. Nevertheless he murdered at table his father-inlaw, Michel Zanche, who is mentioned Canto XXIL 88.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>151. This vituperation of the Genoese reminds one of the bitter Tuscan proverb against them: " Sea without fish; mountains without trees; men without faith; and women without shame."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>154. Friar Alberigo.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="inferno-notes-canto-34">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</span></h4>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>1. The fourth and last division of the Ninth Circle, the Judecca,—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"the smallest circle, at the point Of all the Universe, where Dis is seated."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>The first line, " The banners of the king of Hell come forth," is a parody of the first line of a Latin hymn of the sixth century, sung in the churches during Passion week, and written by Fortunatus, an Italian by birth, but who died Bishop of Poitiers in 600, The first stanza of this hymn is,—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Vexilla regis prodeunt, Fulget crucis mysterium, Quo came carnis conditor, Suspensus est patibulo."</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>See Konigsfeld, Lateinische Hymnen und Gcsiinge aus dem Mittelalter, 64.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>18. Milton, Parad. Lost, V, 708:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"His countenance as the morning star, that guides The starry flock."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>28. Compare Milton's descriptions of Satan, Parad. Lost, I. 192, 589, 11. 636, IV. 985:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"Thus Satan, talking to his nearest mate, "With head uplift above the wave, and eyes That sparkling blazed; his other parts besides Prone on the flood, extended long and large, Lay floating many a rood, in bulk as huge As whom the fables name of monstrous size, Titanian, or Earth-born, that warred on Jove, Briareus, or Typhon, whom the den By ancient Tarsus held, or that sea-beast Leviathan, which God of all his works Created hugest that swim the ocean stream: Him, haply, slumbering on the Norway foam. The pilot of some small night -foundered skiff. Deeming some island, oft, as seamen tell. With fixed anchor in his scaly rind Moors by his side under the lee, while night Invests the sea, and wished morn delays. So stretched out huge in length the Arch-fiend lay Chained on the burning lake."</p>
								<p>"He, above the rest In shape and gesture proudly eminent. Stood like a tower: his form had yet not lost All her original brightness, nor appeared Less than archangel ruined, and the excess Of glory obscured: as when the sun newrisen Looks through the horizontal misty air. Shorn of his beams; or from behind the moon. In dim eclipse, disastrous twilight sheds On half the nations, and with fear of change Perplexes monarchs: darkened so, yet shone Above them all the Archangel."</p>
								<p>"As when far off at sea a fleet descried Hangs in the clouds, by equinoctial winds Close sailing from Bengala or the isles Of Ternate and Tidore, whence merchants bring Their spicy drugs: they on the trading flood Through the wide Ethiopian to the Cape Ply, stemming nightly toward the pole: so seemed Far oflTthe flying fiend."</p>
								<p>"On the other side, Satan, alarmed. Collecting all his might, dilated stood. Like TenerifFor Atlas, unremoved: His stature reached the sky, and on his crest Sat horror plumed; nor wanted in his grasp What seemed both spear and shield."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>38. The Ottimo and Benvenuto both interpret the three faces as symbolizing Ignorance, Hatred, and Impotence. Others interpret them as signifying the three quarters of the then known world, Europe, Asia, and Africa.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>45. Ethiopia; the region about the Cataracts of the Nile.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>48. Milton, Parad. Lost, II. 527:—</p>
							<blockquote>
								<p>"At last his sail-broad vans He spreads for flight, and in the surging smoke Uplifted spurns the ground."</p>
							</blockquote>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>55. Landor in his Pentameron, 527, makes Petrarca say: " This is atrocious, not terrific nor grand. Alighieri is grand by his lights, not by his shadows; by his human aiFections, not by his infernal. As the minutest sands are the labors of some profound sea, or the spoils of some vast mountain, in like manner his horrid wastes and wearying minutenesses are the chafings of a turbulent spirit, grasping the loftiest things, and penetrating the deepest, and moving and moaning on the earth in loneliness and sadness."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>62. Gabriele Rossetti, Spirito Antipapak, I. 75, Miss Ward's Tr., says: *' The three spirits, who hang from the mouths of his Satan, are Judas, Brutus, and Cassius. The poet's reason for selecting those names has never yet been satisfactorily accounted for; but we have no hesitation in pronouncing it to have been this, — he considered the Pope not only a betrayer and seller of Christ, — 'Where gainful merchandise is made of Christ throughout the livelong day,' (Parad. 17,) and for that reason put Judas into his centre mouth; but a traitor and rebel to Caesar, and therefore placed Brutus and Cassius in the other two mouths; for the Pope, who was originally no more than Caesar's vicar, became his enemy, and usurped the capital of his empire, and the supreme authority. His treason to Christ was not discovered by the world in general; hence the face of Judas is hidden, — * He that hath his head within, and plies the feet without ' (Inf, 34); his treason to Caesar was open and manifest, therefore Brutus and Cassius show their faces."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>He adds in a note: "The situation of Judas is the same as that of the Popes who were guilty of simony."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>68. The evening of Holy Saturday.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>77. Iliad, V. 305: " With this he struck the hip of ^neas, where the thigh turns on the hip."</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>95. The canonical day, from sunrise to sunset, was divided into four equal parts, called in Italian Terza, Sesta, Nona, and Vespro, and varying in length with the change of season. " These hours," says Dante, Convito, III. 6, " are short or long according as day and night increase or diminish." Terza was the first division after sunrise; and at the equinox would be from six till nine. Consequently mezza terza, or middle tierce, would be half past seven.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>114. Jerusalem.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>125. The Mountain of Purgatory, rising out of the sea at a point directly opposite Jerusalem, upon the other side of the globe. It is an island in the South Pacific Ocean.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>130. This brooklet is Lethe, whose source is on the summit of the Mountain of Purgatory, flowing down to mingle with Acheron, Styx, and Phlegethon, and form Cocytus. See Canto XIV. 136.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>138. It will be observed that each of the three divisions of the Divine Comedy ends with the word "Stars," suggesting and symbolizing endless aspiration. At the end of the Inferno Dante "re-beholds the stars"; at the end of the Purgatorio he is " ready to ascend to the stars"; at the end of the Paradiso he feels the power of "that Love which moves the sun and other stars." He is now looking upon the morning stars of Easter Sunday.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
