<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Paradiso</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="paradiso" epub:type="volume">
			<section id="paradiso-preface" epub:type="preface z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>I lift mine eyes, and all the windows blaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">⁠With forms of Saints and holy men who died,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">⁠Here martyred and hereafter glorified;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">⁠And the great Rose upon its leaves displays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Christ's Triumph, and the angelic roundelays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">⁠With splendor upon splendor multiplied;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">⁠And Beatrice again at Dante's side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">⁠No more rebukes, but smiles her words of praise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then the organ sounds, and unseen choirs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">⁠Sing the old Latin hymns of peace and love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">⁠And benedictions of the Holy Ghost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the melodious bells among the spires</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">⁠O'er all the house-tops and through heaven above</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">⁠Proclaim the elevation of the Host!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O star of morning and of liberty!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O bringer of the light, whose splendor shines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">⁠Above the darkness of the Apennines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">⁠Forerunner of the day that is to be!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The voices of the city and the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">⁠The voices of the mountains and the pines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">⁠Repeat thy song, till the familiar lines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">⁠Are footpaths for the thought of Italy!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy fame is blown abroad from all the heights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">⁠Through all the nations, and a sound is heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">⁠As of a mighty wind, and men devout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strangers of Rome, and the new proselytes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">⁠In their own language hear thy wondrous word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">⁠And many are amazed and many doubt.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<h2>Paradiso</h2>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto I</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The glory of Him who moveth everything</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth penetrate the universe, and shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In one part more and in another less.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within that heaven which most his light receives</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was I, and things beheld which to repeat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor knows, nor can, who from above descends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because in drawing near to its desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our intellect ingulphs itself so far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That after it the memory cannot go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Truly whatever of the holy realm</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I had the power to treasure in my mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall now become the subject of my song.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O good Apollo, for this last emprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make of me such a vessel of thy power</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As giving the beloved laurel asks!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One summit of Parnassus hitherto</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has been enough for me, but now with both</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I needs must enter the arena left.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enter into my bosom, thou, and breathe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As at the time when Marsyas thou didst draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the scabbard of those limbs of his.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O power divine, lend'st thou thyself to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the shadow of the blessed realm</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stamped in my brain I can make manifest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou'lt see me come unto thy darling tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crown myself thereafter with those leaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which the theme and thou shall make me worthy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So seldom, Father, do we gather them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For triumph or of Caesar or of Poet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(The fault and shame of human inclinations,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the Peneian foliage should bring forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joy to the joyous Delphic deity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When any one it makes to thirst for it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little spark is followed by great flame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perchance with better voices after me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall prayer be made that Cyrrha may respond!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mortal men by passages diverse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uprises the world's lamp; but by that one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which circles four uniteth with three crosses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With better course and with a better star</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Conjoined it issues, and the mundane wax</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tempers and stamps more after its own fashion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Almost that passage had made morning there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evening here, and there was wholly white</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hemisphere, and black the other part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Beatrice towards the left-hand side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw turned round, and gazing at the sun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Never did eagle fasten so upon it!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even as a second ray is wont</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To issue from the first and reascend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to a pilgrim who would fain return,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus of her action, through the eyes infused</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In my imagination, mine I made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sunward fixed mine eyes beyond our wont.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There much is lawful which is here unlawful</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto our powers, by virtue of the place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made for the human species as its own.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not long I bore it, nor so little while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I beheld it sparkle round about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like iron that comes molten from the fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And suddenly it seemed that day to day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was added, as if He who has the power</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had with another sun the heaven adorned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With eyes upon the everlasting wheels</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stood Beatrice all intent, and I, on her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fixing my vision from above removed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such at her aspect inwardly became</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Glaucus, tasting of the herb that made him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Peer of the other gods beneath the sea.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To represent transhumanise in words</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Impossible were; the example, then, suffice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him for whom Grace the experience reserves.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I was merely what of me thou newly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Createdst, Love who governest the heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou knowest, who didst lift me with thy light!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When now the wheel, which thou dost make eternal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Desiring thee, made me attentive to it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By harmony thou dost modulate and measure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then seemed to me so much of heaven enkindled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the sun's flame, that neither rain nor river</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">E'er made a lake so widely spread abroad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The newness of the sound and the great light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kindled in me a longing for their cause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Never before with such acuteness felt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence she, who saw me as I saw myself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To quiet in me my perturbed mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Opened her mouth, ere I did mine to ask,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she began: "Thou makest thyself so dull</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With false imagining, that thou seest not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What thou wouldst see if thou hadst shaken it off.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art not upon earth, as thou believest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lightning, fleeing its appropriate site,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne'er ran as thou, who thitherward returnest."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If of my former doubt I was divested</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By these brief little words more smiled than spoken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I in a new one was the more ensnared;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said: "Already did I rest content</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From great amazement; but am now amazed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In what way I transcend these bodies light."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereupon she, after a pitying sigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her eyes directed tow'rds me with that look</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A mother casts on a delirious child;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she began: "All things whate'er they be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have order among themselves, and this is form,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That makes the universe resemble God.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here do the higher creatures see the footprints</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the Eternal Power, which is the end</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereto is made the law already mentioned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the order that I speak of are inclined</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All natures, by their destinies diverse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More or less near unto their origin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence they move onward unto ports diverse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O'er the great sea of being; and each one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With instinct given it which bears it on.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This bears away the fire towards the moon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This is in mortal hearts the motive power</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This binds together and unites the earth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor only the created things that are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without intelligence this bow shoots forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But those that have both intellect and love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Providence that regulates all this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Makes with its light the heaven forever quiet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein that turns which has the greatest haste.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thither now, as to a site decreed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bears us away the virtue of that cord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which aims its arrows at a joyous mark.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>True is it, that as oftentimes the form</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Accords not with the intention of the art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because in answering is matter deaf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So likewise from this course doth deviate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes the creature, who the power possesses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though thus impelled, to swerve some other way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(In the same wise as one may see the fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fall from a cloud,) if the first impetus</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Earthward is wrested by some false delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shouldst not wonder more, if well I judge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At thine ascent, than at a rivulet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From some high mount descending to the lowland.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Marvel it would be in thee, if deprived</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of hindrance, thou wert seated down below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if on earth the living fire were quiet."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereat she heavenward turned again her face.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto II</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O Ye, who in some pretty little boat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eager to listen, have been following</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behind my ship, that singing sails along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn back to look again upon your shores;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do not put out to sea, lest peradventure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In losing me, you might yourselves be lost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sea I sail has never yet been passed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Minerva breathes, and pilots me Apollo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Muses nine point out to me the Bears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye other few who have the neck uplifted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betimes to th' bread of Angels upon which</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One liveth here and grows not sated by it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well may you launch upon the deep salt-sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your vessel, keeping still my wake before you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the water that grows smooth again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those glorious ones who unto Colchos passed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were not so wonder-struck as you shall be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Jason they beheld a ploughman made!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The con-created and perpetual thirst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the realm deiform did bear us on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As swift almost as ye the heavens behold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upward gazed Beatrice, and I at her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in such space perchance as strikes a bolt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And flies, and from the notch unlocks itself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arrived I saw me where a wondrous thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drew to itself my sight; and therefore she</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whom no care of mine could be concealed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards me turning, blithe as beautiful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said unto me: "Fix gratefully thy mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On God, who unto the first star has brought us."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seemed to me a cloud encompassed us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Luminous, dense, consolidate and bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As adamant on which the sun is striking.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into itself did the eternal pearl</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Receive us, even as water doth receive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A ray of light, remaining still unbroken.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I was body, (and we here conceive not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How one dimension tolerates another,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which needs must be if body enter body,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More the desire should be enkindled in us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That essence to behold, wherein is seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How God and our own nature were united.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There will be seen what we receive by faith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not demonstrated, but self-evident</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In guise of the first truth that man believes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I made reply: "Madonna, as devoutly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As most I can do I give thanks to Him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who has removed me from the mortal world.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But tell me what the dusky spots may be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon this body, which below on earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make people tell that fabulous tale of Cain?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Somewhat she smiled; and then, "If the opinion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of mortals be erroneous," she said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Where'er the key of sense doth not unlock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Certes, the shafts of wonder should not pierce thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now, forasmuch as, following the senses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou seest that the reason has short wings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But tell me what thou think'st of it thyself."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I: "What seems to us up here diverse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is caused, I think, by bodies rare and dense."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she: "Right truly shalt thou see immersed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In error thy belief, if well thou hearest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The argument that I shall make against it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lights many the eighth sphere displays to you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in their quality and quantity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May noted be of aspects different.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If this were caused by rare and dense alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One only virtue would there be in all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or more or less diffused, or equally.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Virtues diverse must be perforce the fruits</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of formal principles; and these, save one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of course would by thy reasoning be destroyed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides, if rarity were of this dimness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cause thou askest, either through and through</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This planet thus attenuate were of matter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else, as in a body is apportioned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fat and lean, so in like manner this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would in its volume interchange the leaves.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were it the former, in the sun's eclipse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It would be manifest by the shining through</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of light, as through aught tenuous interfused.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is not so; hence we must scan the other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if it chance the other I demolish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then falsified will thy opinion be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if this rarity go not through and through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There needs must be a limit, beyond which</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its contrary prevents the further passing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thence the foreign radiance is reflected,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as a colour cometh back from glass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which behind itself concealeth lead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now thou wilt say the sunbeam shows itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More dimly there than in the other parts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By being there reflected farther back.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From this reply experiment will free thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If e'er thou try it, which is wont to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fountain to the rivers of your arts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three mirrors shalt thou take, and two remove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alike from thee, the other more remote</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Between the former two shall meet thine eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turned towards these, cause that behind thy back</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be placed a light, illuming the three mirrors</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And coming back to thee by all reflected.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though in its quantity be not so ample</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The image most remote, there shalt thou see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How it perforce is equally resplendent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, as beneath the touches of warm rays</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Naked the subject of the snow remains</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both of its former colour and its cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee thus remaining in thy intellect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will I inform with such a living light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it shall tremble in its aspect to thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within the heaven of the divine repose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Revolves a body, in whose virtue lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The being of whatever it contains.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The following heaven, that has so many eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Divides this being by essences diverse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Distinguished from it, and by it contained.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other spheres, by various differences,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All the distinctions which they have within them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dispose unto their ends and their effects.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus do these organs of the world proceed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As thou perceivest now, from grade to grade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since from above they take, and act beneath.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Observe me well, how through this place I come</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the truth thou wishest, that hereafter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou mayst alone know how to keep the ford</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The power and motion of the holy spheres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As from the artisan the hammer's craft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth from the blessed motors must proceed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heaven, which lights so manifold make fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the Intelligence profound, which turns it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The image takes, and makes of it a seal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even as the soul within your dust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through members different and accommodated</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To faculties diverse expands itself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So likewise this Intelligence diffuses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its virtue multiplied among the stars.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Itself revolving on its unity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Virtue diverse doth a diverse alloyage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make with the precious body that it quickens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which, as life in you, it is combined.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the glad nature whence it is derived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mingled virtue through the body shines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as gladness through the living pupil.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From this proceeds whate'er from light to light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Appeareth different, not from dense and rare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This is the formal principle that produces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>According to its goodness, dark and bright."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto III</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>That Sun, which erst with love my bosom warmed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of beauteous truth had unto me discovered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By proving and reproving, the sweet aspect.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, that I might confess myself convinced</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And confident, so far as was befitting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I lifted more erect my head to speak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there appeared a vision, which withdrew me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So close to it, in order to be seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That my confession I remembered not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as through polished and transparent glass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or waters crystalline and undisturbed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not so deep as that their bed be lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come back again the outlines of our faces</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So feeble, that a pearl on forehead white</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Comes not less speedily unto our eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such saw I many faces prompt to speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that I ran in error opposite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To that which kindled love 'twixt man and fountain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as I became aware of them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Esteeming them as mirrored semblances,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see of whom they were, mine eyes I turned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nothing saw, and once more turned them forward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Direct into the light of my sweet Guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who smiling kindled in her holy eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Marvel thou not," she said to me, "because</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I smile at this thy puerile conceit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since on the truth it trusts not yet its foot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But turns thee, as 'tis wont, on emptiness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">True substances are these which thou beholdest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here relegate for breaking of some vow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore speak with them, listen and believe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the true light, which giveth peace to them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Permits them not to turn from it their feet."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I unto the shade that seemed most wishful</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To speak directed me, and I began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one whom too great eagerness bewilders:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"O well-created spirit, who in the rays</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of life eternal dost the sweetness taste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which being untasted ne'er is comprehended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grateful 'twill be to me, if thou content me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both with thy name and with your destiny."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat she promptly and with laughing eyes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Our charity doth never shut the doors</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against a just desire, except as one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who wills that all her court be like herself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was a virgin sister in the world;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if thy mind doth contemplate me well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The being more fair will not conceal me from thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou shalt recognise I am Piccarda,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, stationed here among these other blessed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Myself am blessed in the slowest sphere.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All our affections, that alone inflamed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are in the pleasure of the Holy Ghost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rejoice at being of his order formed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this allotment, which appears so low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore is given us, because our vows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have been neglected and in some part void."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence I to her: "In your miraculous aspects</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There shines I know not what of the divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which doth transform you from our first conceptions.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore I was not swift in my remembrance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what thou tellest me now aids me so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the refiguring is easier to me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But tell me, ye who in this place are happy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are you desirous of a higher place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see more or to make yourselves more friends?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First with those other shades she smiled a little;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereafter answered me so full of gladness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She seemed to burn in the first fire of love:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Brother, our will is quieted by virtue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of charity, that makes us wish alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For what we have, nor gives us thirst for more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If to be more exalted we aspired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Discordant would our aspirations be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the will of Him who here secludes us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which thou shalt see finds no place in these circles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If being in charity is needful here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if thou lookest well into its nature;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay, 'tis essential to this blest existence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To keep itself within the will divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby our very wishes are made one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that, as we are station above station</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throughout this realm, to all the realm 'tis pleasing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As to the King, who makes his will our will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his will is our peace; this is the sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which is moving onward whatsoever</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It doth create, and all that nature makes."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then it was clear to me how everywhere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In heaven is Paradise, although the grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of good supreme there rain not in one measure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as it comes to pass, if one food sates,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for another still remains the longing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We ask for this, and that decline with thanks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E'en thus did I; with gesture and with word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To learn from her what was the web wherein</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She did not ply the shuttle to the end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"A perfect life and merit high in-heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A lady o'er us," said she, "by whose rule</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down in your world they vest and veil themselves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That until death they may both watch and sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beside that Spouse who every vow accepts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which charity conformeth to his pleasure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To follow her, in girlhood from the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I fled, and in her habit shut myself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pledged me to the pathway of her sect.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then men accustomed unto evil more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than unto good, from the sweet cloister tore me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">God knows what afterward my life became.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This other splendour, which to thee reveals</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Itself on my right side, and is enkindled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all the illumination of our sphere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What of myself I say applies to her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A nun was she, and likewise from her head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was ta'en the shadow of the sacred wimple.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when she too was to the world returned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against her wishes and against good usage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the heart's veil she never was divested.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of great Costanza this is the effulgence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who from the second wind of Suabia</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brought forth the third and latest puissance."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus unto me she spake, and then began</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ave Maria" singing, and in singing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vanished, as through deep water something heavy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sight, that followed her as long a time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it was possible, when it had lost her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turned round unto the mark of more desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wholly unto Beatrice reverted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she such lightnings flashed into mine eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That at the first my sight endured it not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this in questioning more backward made me.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto IV</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Between two viands, equally removed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tempting, a free man would die of hunger</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere either he could bring unto his teeth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So would a lamb between the ravenings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of two fierce wolves stand fearing both alike;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so would stand a dog between two does.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence, if I held my peace, myself I blame not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Impelled in equal measure by my doubts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since it must be so, nor do I commend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I held my peace; but my desire was painted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon my face, and questioning with that</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More fervent far than by articulate speech.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beatrice did as Daniel had done</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Relieving Nebuchadnezzar from the wrath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which rendered him unjustly merciless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said: "Well see I how attracteth thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One and the other wish, so that thy care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Binds itself so that forth it does not breathe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou arguest, if good will be permanent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The violence of others, for what reason</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth it decrease the measure of my merit?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again for doubting furnish thee occasion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Souls seeming to return unto the stars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">According to the sentiment of Plato.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These are the questions which upon thy wish</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are thrusting equally; and therefore first</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will I treat that which hath the most of gall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He of the Seraphim most absorbed in God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Moses, and Samuel, and whichever John</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou mayst select, I say, and even Mary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have not in any other heaven their seats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than have those spirits that just appeared to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor of existence more or fewer years;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all make beautiful the primal circle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And have sweet life in different degrees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By feeling more or less the eternal breath.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They showed themselves here, not because allotted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This sphere has been to them, but to give sign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the celestial which is least exalted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To speak thus is adapted to your mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since only through the sense it apprehendeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What then it worthy makes of intellect.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On this account the Scripture condescends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto your faculties, and feet and hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To God attributes, and means something else;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Holy Church under an aspect human</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gabriel and Michael represent to you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him who made Tobias whole again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That which Timaeus argues of the soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth not resemble that which here is seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because it seems that as he speaks he thinks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He says the soul unto its star returns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Believing it to have been severed thence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whenever nature gave it as a form.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps his doctrine is of other guise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than the words sound, and possibly may be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With meaning that is not to be derided.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he doth mean that to these wheels return</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The honour of their influence and the blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps his bow doth hit upon some truth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This principle ill understood once warped</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whole world nearly, till it went astray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Invoking Jove and Mercury and Mars.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other doubt which doth disquiet thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Less venom has, for its malevolence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could never lead thee otherwhere from me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That as unjust our justice should appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In eyes of mortals, is an argument</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of faith, and not of sin heretical.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still, that your perception may be able</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thoroughly penetrate this verity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As thou desirest, I will satisfy thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If it be violence when he who suffers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Co-operates not with him who uses force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These souls were not on that account excused;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For will is never quenched unless it will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But operates as nature doth in fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If violence a thousand times distort it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence, if it yieldeth more or less, it seconds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The force; and these have done so, having power</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of turning back unto the holy place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If their will had been perfect, like to that</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Lawrence fast upon his gridiron held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Mutius made severe to his own hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It would have urged them back along the road</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence they were dragged, as soon as they were free;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But such a solid will is all too rare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by these words, if thou hast gathered them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As thou shouldst do, the argument is refuted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That would have still annoyed thee many times.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now another passage runs across</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before thine eyes, and such that by thyself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou couldst not thread it ere thou wouldst be weary.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have for certain put into thy mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That soul beatified could never lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For it is near the primal Truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then thou from Piccarda might'st have heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Costanza kept affection for the veil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that she seemeth here to contradict me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many times, brother, has it come to pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, to escape from peril, with reluctance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That has been done it was not right to do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E'en as Alcmaeon (who, being by his father</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereto entreated, his own mother slew)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not to lose pity pitiless became.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At this point I desire thee to remember</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That force with will commingles, and they cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the offences cannot be excused.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will absolute consenteth not to evil;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in so far consenteth as it fears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If it refrain, to fall into more harm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence when Piccarda uses this expression,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She meaneth the will absolute, and I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other, so that both of us speak truth."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such was the flowing of the holy river</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That issued from the fount whence springs all truth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This put to rest my wishes one and all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"O love of the first lover, O divine,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said I forthwith, "whose speech inundates me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And warms me so, it more and more revives me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My own affection is not so profound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As to suffice in rendering grace for grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let Him, who sees and can, thereto respond.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well I perceive that never sated is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our intellect unless the Truth illume it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beyond which nothing true expands itself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It rests therein, as wild beast in his lair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When it attains it; and it can attain it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If not, then each desire would frustrate be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore springs up, in fashion of a shoot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doubt at the foot of truth; and this is nature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to the top from height to height impels us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This doth invite me, this assurance give me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With reverence, Lady, to inquire of you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another truth, which is obscure to me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wish to know if man can satisfy you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For broken vows with other good deeds, so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in your balance they will not be light."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beatrice gazed upon me with her eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of the sparks of love, and so divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, overcome my power, I turned my back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And almost lost myself with eyes downcast.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto V</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>"If in the heat of love I flame upon thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beyond the measure that on earth is seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the valour of thine eyes I vanquish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Marvel thou not thereat; for this proceeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From perfect sight, which as it apprehends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the good apprehended moves its feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well I perceive how is already shining</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into thine intellect the eternal light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That only seen enkindles always love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if some other thing your love seduce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'Tis nothing but a vestige of the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ill understood, which there is shining through.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou fain wouldst know if with another service</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For broken vow can such return be made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As to secure the soul from further claim."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Canto thus did Beatrice begin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, as a man who breaks not off his speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Continued thus her holy argument:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"The greatest gift that in his largess God</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Creating made, and unto his own goodness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nearest conformed, and that which he doth prize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most highly, is the freedom of the will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith the creatures of intelligence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both all and only were and are endowed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now wilt thou see, if thence thou reasonest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The high worth of a vow, if it he made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that when thou consentest God consents:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, closing between God and man the compact,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sacrifice is of this treasure made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as I say, and made by its own act.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What can be rendered then as compensation?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Think'st thou to make good use of what thou'st offered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With gains ill gotten thou wouldst do good deed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now art thou certain of the greater point;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But because Holy Church in this dispenses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which seems against the truth which I have shown thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behoves thee still to sit awhile at table,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because the solid food which thou hast taken</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Requireth further aid for thy digestion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Open thy mind to that which I reveal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fix it there within; for 'tis not knowledge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The having heard without retaining it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the essence of this sacrifice two things</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Convene together; and the one is that</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which 'tis made, the other is the agreement.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This last for evermore is cancelled not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unless complied with, and concerning this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such precision has above been spoken.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore it was enjoined upon the Hebrews</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To offer still, though sometimes what was offered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might be commuted, as thou ought'st to know.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other, which is known to thee as matter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May well indeed be such that one errs not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If it for other matter be exchanged.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let none shift the burden on his shoulder</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At his arbitrament, without the turning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both of the white and of the yellow key;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every permutation deem as foolish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If in the substitute the thing relinquished,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As the four is in six, be not contained.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore whatever thing has so great weight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In value that it drags down every balance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cannot be satisfied with other spending.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let mortals never take a vow in jest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be faithful and not blind in doing that,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Jephthah was in his first offering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom more beseemed to say, 'I have done wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than to do worse by keeping; and as foolish</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou the great leader of the Greeks wilt find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence wept Iphigenia her fair face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made for her both wise and simple weep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who heard such kind of worship spoken of.'</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Christians, be ye more serious in your movements;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be ye not like a feather at each wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And think not every water washes you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye have the Old and the New Testament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the Pastor of the Church who guideth you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let this suffice you unto your salvation.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If evil appetite cry aught else to you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be ye as men, and not as silly sheep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the Jew among you may not mock you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be ye not as the lamb that doth abandon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its mother's milk, and frolicsome and simple</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Combats at its own pleasure with itself."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus Beatrice to me even as I write it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then all desireful turned herself again</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To that part where the world is most alive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her silence and her change of countenance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Silence imposed upon my eager mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had already in advance new questions;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as an arrow that upon the mark</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strikes ere the bowstring quiet hath become,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did we speed into the second realm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Lady there so joyful I beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As into the brightness of that heaven she entered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More luminous thereat the planet grew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if the star itself was changed and smiled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What became I, who by my nature am</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exceeding mutable in every guise!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As, in a fish-pond which is pure and tranquil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fishes draw to that which from without</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Comes in such fashion that their food they deem it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So I beheld more than a thousand splendours</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drawing towards us, and in each was heard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Lo, this is she who shall increase our love."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as each one was coming unto us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of beatitude the shade was seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the effulgence clear that issued from it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Think, Reader, if what here is just beginning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No farther should proceed, how thou wouldst have</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An agonizing need of knowing more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of thyself thou'lt see how I from these</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was in desire of hearing their conditions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As they unto mine eyes were manifest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"O thou well-born, unto whom Grace concedes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see the thrones of the eternal triumph,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ever yet the warfare be abandoned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With light that through the whole of heaven is spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kindled are we, and hence if thou desirest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To know of us, at thine own pleasure sate thee."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus by some one among those holy spirits</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was spoken, and by Beatrice: "Speak, speak</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Securely, and believe them even as Gods."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Well I perceive how thou dost nest thyself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In thine own light, and drawest it from thine eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because they coruscate when thou dost smile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But know not who thou art, nor why thou hast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spirit august, thy station in the sphere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That veils itself to men in alien rays."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This said I in direction of the light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which first had spoken to me; whence it became</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By far more lucent than it was before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as the sun, that doth conceal himself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By too much light, when heat has worn away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The tempering influence of the vapours dense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By greater rapture thus concealed itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In its own radiance the figure saintly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thus close, close enfolded answered me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In fashion as the following Canto sings.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto VI</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>"After that Constantine the eagle turned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the course of heaven, which it had followed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behind the ancient who Lavinia took,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two hundred years and more the bird of God</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the extreme of Europe held itself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Near to the mountains whence it issued first;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And under shadow of the sacred plumes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It governed there the world from hand to hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, changing thus, upon mine own alighted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Caesar I was, and am Justinian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, by the will of primal Love I feel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Took from the laws the useless and redundant;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ere unto the work I was attent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One nature to exist in Christ, not more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Believed, and with such faith was I contented.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But blessed Agapetus, he who was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The supreme pastor, to the faith sincere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pointed me out the way by words of his.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him I believed, and what was his assertion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I now see clearly, even as thou seest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each contradiction to be false and true.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as with the Church I moved my feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">God in his grace it pleased with this high task</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To inspire me, and I gave me wholly to it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to my Belisarius I commended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The arms, to which was heaven's right hand so joined</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was a signal that I should repose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now here to the first question terminates</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My answer; but the character thereof</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Constrains me to continue with a sequel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In order that thou see with how great reason</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Men move against the standard sacrosanct,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both who appropriate and who oppose it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold how great a power has made it worthy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of reverence, beginning from the hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Pallas died to give it sovereignty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou knowest it made in Alba its abode</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three hundred years and upward, till at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The three to three fought for it yet again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou knowest what it achieved from Sabine wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down to Lucretia's sorrow, in seven kings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O'ercoming round about the neighboring nations;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou knowest what it achieved, borne by the Romans</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Illustrious against Brennus, against Pyrrhus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the other princes and confederates.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Torquatus thence and Quinctius, who from locks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unkempt was named, Decii and Fabii,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Received the fame I willingly embalm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It struck to earth the pride of the Arabians,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, following Hannibal, had passed across</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Alpine ridges, Po, from which thou glidest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath it triumphed while they yet were young</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pompey and Scipio, and to the hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath which thou wast born it bitter seemed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, near unto the time when heaven had willed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bring the whole world to its mood serene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did Caesar by the will of Rome assume it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What it achieved from Var unto the Rhine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Isere beheld and Saone, beheld the Seine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every valley whence the Rhone is filled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What it achieved when it had left Ravenna,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And leaped the Rubicon, was such a flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That neither tongue nor pen could follow it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round towards Spain it wheeled its legions; then</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towards Durazzo, and Pharsalia smote</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the calid Nile was felt the pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Antandros and the Simois, whence it started,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It saw again, and there where Hector lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ill for Ptolemy then roused itself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thence it came like lightning upon Juba;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then wheeled itself again into your West,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where the Pompeian clarion it heard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From what it wrought with the next standard-bearer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brutus and Cassius howl in Hell together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Modena and Perugia dolent were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still doth the mournful Cleopatra weep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because thereof, who, fleeing from before it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Took from the adder sudden and black death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With him it ran even to the Red Sea shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With him it placed the world in so great peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That unto Janus was his temple closed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what the standard that has made me speak</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Achieved before, and after should achieve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throughout the mortal realm that lies beneath it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Becometh in appearance mean and dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If in the hand of the third Caesar seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With eye unclouded and affection pure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because the living Justice that inspires me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Granted it, in the hand of him I speak of,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The glory of doing vengeance for its wrath.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now here attend to what I answer thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Later it ran with Titus to do vengeance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the vengeance of the ancient sin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when the tooth of Lombardy had bitten</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Holy Church, then underneath its wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did Charlemagne victorious succor her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now hast thou power to judge of such as those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom I accused above, and of their crimes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which are the cause of all your miseries.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the public standard one the yellow lilies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Opposes, the other claims it for a party,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that 'tis hard to see which sins the most.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let, let the Ghibellines ply their handicraft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath some other standard; for this ever</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ill follows he who it and justice parts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let not this new Charles e'er strike it down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He and his Guelfs, but let him fear the talons</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from a nobler lion stripped the fell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already oftentimes the sons have wept</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The father's crime; and let him not believe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That God will change His scutcheon for the lilies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This little planet doth adorn itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the good spirits that have active been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fame and honour might come after them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whensoever the desires mount thither,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus deviating, must perforce the rays</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the true love less vividly mount upward.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in commensuration of our wages</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With our desert is portion of our joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because we see them neither less nor greater.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Herein doth living Justice sweeten so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Affection in us, that for evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It cannot warp to any iniquity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Voices diverse make up sweet melodies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So in this life of ours the seats diverse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Render sweet harmony among these spheres;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the compass of this present pearl</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shineth the sheen of Romeo, of whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The grand and beauteous work was ill rewarded.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the Provencals who against him wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They have not laughed, and therefore ill goes he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who makes his hurt of the good deeds of others.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Four daughters, and each one of them a queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had Raymond Berenger, and this for him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did Romeo, a poor man and a pilgrim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then malicious words incited him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To summon to a reckoning this just man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who rendered to him seven and five for ten.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he departed poor and stricken in years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if the world could know the heart he had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In begging bit by bit his livelihood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though much it laud him, it would laud him more."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto VII</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>"Osanna sanctus Deus Sabaoth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Superillustrans claritate tua</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Felices ignes horum malahoth!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this wise, to his melody returning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This substance, upon which a double light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doubles itself, was seen by me to sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to their dance this and the others moved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the manner of swift-hurrying sparks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Veiled themselves from me with a sudden distance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doubting was I, and saying, "Tell her, tell her,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within me, "tell her," saying, "tell my Lady,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who slakes my thirst with her sweet effluences;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet that reverence which doth lord it over</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whole of me only by B and ICE,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bowed me again like unto one who drowses.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Short while did Beatrice endure me thus;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she began, lighting me with a smile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as would make one happy in the fire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"According to infallible advisement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After what manner a just vengeance justly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could be avenged has put thee upon thinking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I will speedily thy mind unloose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And do thou listen, for these words of mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a great doctrine will a present make thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By not enduring on the power that wills</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Curb for his good, that man who ne'er was born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Damning himself damned all his progeny;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereby the human species down below</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lay sick for many centuries in great error,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till to descend it pleased the Word of God</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To where the nature, which from its own Maker</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Estranged itself, he joined to him in person</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the sole act of his eternal love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now unto what is said direct thy sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This nature when united to its Maker,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as created, was sincere and good;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But by itself alone was banished forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Paradise, because it turned aside</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the way of truth and of its life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore the penalty the cross held out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If measured by the nature thus assumed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">None ever yet with so great justice stung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And none was ever of so great injustice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Considering who the Person was that suffered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within whom such a nature was contracted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From one act therefore issued things diverse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To God and to the Jews one death was pleasing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Earth trembled at it and the Heaven was opened.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It should no longer now seem difficult</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thee, when it is said that a just vengeance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By a just court was afterward avenged.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now do I behold thy mind entangled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From thought to thought within a knot, from which</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With great desire it waits to free itself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou sayest, 'Well discern I what I hear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But it is hidden from me why God willed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For our redemption only this one mode.'</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Buried remaineth, brother, this decree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the eyes of every one whose nature</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is in the flame of love not yet adult.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Verily, inasmuch as at this mark</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One gazes long and little is discerned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore this mode was worthiest will I say.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Goodness Divine, which from itself doth spurn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All envy, burning in itself so sparkles</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the eternal beauties it unfolds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whate'er from this immediately distils</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has afterwards no end, for ne'er removed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is its impression when it sets its seal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whate'er from this immediately rains down</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is wholly free, because it is not subject</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the influences of novel things.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more conformed thereto, the more it pleases;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the blest ardour that irradiates all things</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that most like itself is most vivacious.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all of these things has advantaged been</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The human creature; and if one be wanting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From his nobility he needs must fall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'Tis sin alone which doth disfranchise him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And render him unlike the Good Supreme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that he little with its light is blanched,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to his dignity no more returns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unless he fill up where transgression empties</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With righteous pains for criminal delights.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your nature when it sinned so utterly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In its own seed, out of these dignities</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as out of Paradise was driven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor could itself recover, if thou notest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With nicest subtilty, by any way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Except by passing one of these two fords:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Either that God through clemency alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had pardon granted, or that man himself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had satisfaction for his folly made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fix now thine eye deep into the abyss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the eternal counsel, to my speech</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As far as may be fastened steadfastly!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Man in his limitations had not power</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To satisfy, not having power to sink</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his humility obeying then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far as he disobeying thought to rise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for this reason man has been from power</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of satisfying by himself excluded.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore it God behoved in his own ways</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Man to restore unto his perfect life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I say in one, or else in both of them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But since the action of the doer is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much more grateful, as it more presents</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The goodness of the heart from which it issues,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Goodness Divine, that doth imprint the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has been contented to proceed by each</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all its ways to lift you up again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor 'twixt the first day and the final night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such high and such magnificent proceeding</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By one or by the other was or shall be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For God more bounteous was himself to give</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make man able to uplift himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than if he only of himself had pardoned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the other modes were insufficient</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For justice, were it not the Son of God</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himself had humbled to become incarnate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, to fill fully each desire of thine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Return I to elucidate one place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In order that thou there mayst see as I do.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou sayst: 'I see the air, I see the fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The water, and the earth, and all their mixtures</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come to corruption, and short while endure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And these things notwithstanding were created;'</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore if that which I have said were true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They should have been secure against corruption.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Angels, brother, and the land sincere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which thou art, created may be called</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Just as they are in their entire existence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all the elements which thou hast named,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all those things which out of them are made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By a created virtue are informed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Created was the matter which they have;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Created was the informing influence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within these stars that round about them go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soul of every brute and of the plants</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By its potential temperament attracts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ray and motion of the holy lights;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But your own life immediately inspires</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Supreme Beneficence, and enamours it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So with herself, it evermore desires her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou from this mayst argue furthermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your resurrection, if thou think again</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How human flesh was fashioned at that time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the first parents both of them were made."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto VIII</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The world used in its peril to believe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the fair Cypria delirious love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rayed out, in the third epicycle turning;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore not only unto her paid honour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sacrifices and of votive cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ancient nations in the ancient error,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But both Dione honoured they and Cupid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That as her mother, this one as her son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said that he had sat in Dido's lap;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they from her, whence I beginning take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Took the denomination of the star</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That woos the sun, now following, now in front.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was not ware of our ascending to it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of our being in it gave full faith</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Lady whom I saw more beauteous grow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as within a flame a spark is seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as within a voice a voice discerned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When one is steadfast, and one comes and goes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within that light beheld I other lamps</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Move in a circle, speeding more and less,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Methinks in measure of their inward vision.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From a cold cloud descended never winds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or visible or not, so rapidly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They would not laggard and impeded seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To any one who had those lights divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seen come towards us, leaving the gyration</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Begun at first in the high Seraphim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And behind those that most in front appeared</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sounded "Osanna!" so that never since</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hear again was I without desire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then unto us more nearly one approached,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And it alone began: "We all are ready</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto thy pleasure, that thou joy in us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We turn around with the celestial Princes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One gyre and one gyration and one thirst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom thou in the world of old didst say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'Ye who, intelligent, the third heaven are moving;'</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And are so full of love, to pleasure thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little quiet will not be less sweet."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After these eyes of mine themselves had offered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto my Lady reverently, and she</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Content and certain of herself had made them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back to the light they turned, which so great promise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made of itself, and "Say, who art thou?" was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My voice, imprinted with a great affection.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O how and how much I beheld it grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the new joy that superadded was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto its joys, as soon as I had spoken!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus changed, it said to me: "The world possessed me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Short time below; and, if it had been more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much evil will be which would not have been.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My gladness keepeth me concealed from thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which rayeth round about me, and doth hide me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as a creature swathed in its own silk.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much didst thou love me, and thou hadst good reason;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For had I been below, I should have shown thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Somewhat beyond the foliage of my love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That left-hand margin, which doth bathe itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Rhone, when it is mingled with the Sorgue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me for its lord awaited in due time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that horn of Ausonia, which is towned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Bari, with Gaeta and Catona,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence Tronto and Verde in the sea disgorge.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already flashed upon my brow the crown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that dominion which the Danube waters</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After the German borders it abandons;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And beautiful Trinacria, that is murky</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'Twixt Pachino and Peloro, (on the gulf</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which greatest scath from Eurus doth receive,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not through Typhoeus, but through nascent sulphur,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would have awaited her own monarchs still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through me from Charles descended and from Rudolph,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If evil lordship, that exasperates ever</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The subject populations, had not moved</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Palermo to the outcry of 'Death! death!'</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if my brother could but this foresee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The greedy poverty of Catalonia</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Straight would he flee, that it might not molest him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For verily 'tis needful to provide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through him or other, so that on his bark</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Already freighted no more freight be placed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His nature, which from liberal covetous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Descended, such a soldiery would need</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As should not care for hoarding in a chest."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Because I do believe the lofty joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy speech infuses into me, my Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where every good thing doth begin and end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou seest as I see it, the more grateful</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is it to me; and this too hold I dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That gazing upon God thou dost discern it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glad hast thou made me; so make clear to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since speaking thou hast stirred me up to doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How from sweet seed can bitter issue forth."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This I to him; and he to me: "If I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can show to thee a truth, to what thou askest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy face thou'lt hold as thou dost hold thy back.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Good which all the realm thou art ascending</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turns and contents, maketh its providence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be a power within these bodies vast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not alone the natures are foreseen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within the mind that in itself is perfect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But they together with their preservation.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whatsoever thing this bow shoots forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Falls foreordained unto an end foreseen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as a shaft directed to its mark.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that were not, the heaven which thou dost walk</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would in such manner its effects produce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they no longer would be arts, but ruins.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This cannot be, if the Intelligences</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That keep these stars in motion are not maimed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And maimed the First that has not made them perfect.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wilt thou this truth have clearer made to thee?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I: "Not so; for 'tis impossible</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nature tire, I see, in what is needful."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence he again: "Now say, would it be worse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For men on earth were they not citizens?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Yes," I replied; "and here I ask no reason."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"And can they be so, if below they live not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Diversely unto offices diverse?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No, if your master writeth well for you."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So came he with deductions to this point;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then he concluded: "Therefore it behoves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The roots of your effects to be diverse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence one is Solon born, another Xerxes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another Melchisedec, and another he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, flying through the air, his son did lose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Revolving Nature, which a signet is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To mortal wax, doth practise well her art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not one inn distinguish from another;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thence happens it that Esau differeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In seed from Jacob; and Quirinus comes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From sire so vile that he is given to Mars.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A generated nature its own way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would always make like its progenitors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If Providence divine were not triumphant.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now that which was behind thee is before thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that thou know that I with thee am pleased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a corollary will I mantle thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Evermore nature, if it fortune find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Discordant to it, like each other seed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of its region, maketh evil thrift;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if the world below would fix its mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the foundation which is laid by nature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pursuing that, 'twould have the people good.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But you unto religion wrench aside</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him who was born to gird him with the sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make a king of him who is for sermons;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore your footsteps wander from the road."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto IX</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Beautiful Clemence, after that thy Charles</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had me enlightened, he narrated to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The treacheries his seed should undergo;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But said: "Be still and let the years roll round;"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So I can only say, that lamentation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Legitimate shall follow on your wrongs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of that holy light the life already</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had to the Sun which fills it turned again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As to that good which for each thing sufficeth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, souls deceived, and creatures impious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who from such good do turn away your hearts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Directing upon vanity your foreheads!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now, behold, another of those splendours</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approached me, and its will to pleasure me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It signified by brightening outwardly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The eyes of Beatrice, that fastened were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon me, as before, of dear assent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To my desire assurance gave to me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Ah, bring swift compensation to my wish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou blessed spirit," I said, "and give me proof</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That what I think in thee I can reflect!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat the light, that still was new to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of its depths, whence it before was singing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one delighted to do good, continued:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Within that region of the land depraved</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Italy, that lies between Rialto</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fountain-heads of Brenta and of Piava,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rises a hill, and mounts not very high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefrom descended formerly a torch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made upon that region great assault.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of one root were born both I and it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cunizza was I called, and here I shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because the splendour of this star o'ercame me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But gladly to myself the cause I pardon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of my allotment, and it does not grieve me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which would perhaps seem strong unto your vulgar.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this so luculent and precious jewel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of our heaven is nearest unto me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great fame remained; and ere it die away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This hundredth year shall yet quintupled be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">See if man ought to make him excellent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that another life the first may leave!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus thinks not the present multitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shut in by Adige and Tagliamento,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor yet for being scourged is penitent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But soon 'twill be that Padua in the marsh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will change the water that Vicenza bathes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because the folk are stubborn against duty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where the Sile and Cagnano join</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One lordeth it, and goes with lofty head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For catching whom e'en now the net is making.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feltro moreover of her impious pastor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall weep the crime, which shall so monstrous be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That for the like none ever entered Malta.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ample exceedingly would be the vat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of the Ferrarese could hold the blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And weary who should weigh it ounce by ounce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which this courteous priest shall make a gift</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To show himself a partisan; and such gifts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will to the living of the land conform.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above us there are mirrors, Thrones you call them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From which shines out on us God Judicant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that this utterance seems good to us."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here it was silent, and it had the semblance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of being turned elsewhither, by the wheel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which it entered as it was before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other joy, already known to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Became a thing transplendent in my sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As a fine ruby smitten by the sun.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through joy effulgence is acquired above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As here a smile; but down below, the shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Outwardly darkens, as the mind is sad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"God seeth all things, and in Him, blest spirit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy sight is," said I, "so that never will</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his can possibly from thee be hidden;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy voice, then, that for ever makes the heavens</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Glad, with the singing of those holy fires</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of their six wings make themselves a cowl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore does it not satisfy my longings?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Indeed, I would not wait thy questioning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If I in thee were as thou art in me."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"The greatest of the valleys where the water</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Expands itself," forthwith its words began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"That sea excepted which the earth engarlands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between discordant shores against the sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Extends so far, that it meridian makes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where it was wont before to make the horizon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was a dweller on that valley's shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'Twixt Ebro and Magra that with journey short</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth from the Tuscan part the Genoese.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the same sunset and same sunrise nearly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sit Buggia and the city whence I was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with its blood once made the harbour hot.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Folco that people called me unto whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My name was known; and now with me this heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Imprints itself, as I did once with it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For more the daughter of Belus never burned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Offending both Sichaeus and Creusa,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than I, so long as it became my locks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor yet that Rodophean, who deluded</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">was by Demophoon, nor yet Alcides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Iole he in his heart had locked.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet here is no repenting, but we smile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not at the fault, which comes not back to mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But at the power which ordered and foresaw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here we behold the art that doth adorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such affection, and the good discover</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby the world above turns that below.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that thou wholly satisfied mayst bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy wishes hence which in this sphere are born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still farther to proceed behoveth me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou fain wouldst know who is within this light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That here beside me thus is scintillating,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as a sunbeam in the limpid water.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then know thou, that within there is at rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rahab, and being to our order joined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With her in its supremest grade 'tis sealed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into this heaven, where ends the shadowy cone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cast by your world, before all other souls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First of Christ's triumph was she taken up.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full meet it was to leave her in some heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as a palm of the high victory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he acquired with one palm and the other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because she favoured the first glorious deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Joshua upon the Holy Land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That little stirs the memory of the Pope.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy city, which an offshoot is of him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who first upon his Maker turned his back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whose ambition is so sorely wept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brings forth and scatters the accursed flower</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which both the sheep and lambs hath led astray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since it has turned the shepherd to a wolf.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For this the Evangel and the mighty Doctors</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are derelict, and only the Decretals</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So studied that it shows upon their margins.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On this are Pope and Cardinals intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their meditations reach not Nazareth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where his pinions Gabriel unfolded;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Vatican and the other parts elect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Rome, which have a cemetery been</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the soldiery that followed Peter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall soon be free from this adultery."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto X</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Looking into his Son with all the Love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which each of them eternally breathes forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Primal and unutterable Power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whate'er before the mind or eye revolves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With so much order made, there can be none</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who this beholds without enjoying Him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lift up then, Reader, to the lofty wheels</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With me thy vision straight unto that part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where the one motion on the other strikes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there begin to contemplate with joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Master's art, who in himself so loves it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never doth his eye depart therefrom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold how from that point goes branching off</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The oblique circle, which conveys the planets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To satisfy the world that calls upon them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if their pathway were not thus inflected,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much virtue in the heavens would be in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And almost every power below here dead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If from the straight line distant more or less</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were the departure, much would wanting be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above and underneath of mundane order.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remain now, Reader, still upon thy bench,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In thought pursuing that which is foretasted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thou wouldst jocund be instead of weary.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I've set before thee; henceforth feed thyself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to itself diverteth all my care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That theme whereof I have been made the scribe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The greatest of the ministers of nature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with the power of heaven the world imprints</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And measures with his light the time for us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With that part which above is called to mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Conjoined, along the spirals was revolving,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where each time earlier he presents himself;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I was with him; but of the ascending</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I was not conscious, saving as a man</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a first thought is conscious ere it come;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Beatrice, she who is seen to pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From good to better, and so suddenly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That not by time her action is expressed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How lucent in herself must she have been!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And what was in the sun, wherein I entered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Apparent not by colour but by light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, though I call on genius, art, and practice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cannot so tell that it could be imagined;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Believe one can, and let him long to see it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if our fantasies too lowly are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For altitude so great, it is no marvel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since o'er the sun was never eye could go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such in this place was the fourth family</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the high Father, who forever sates it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Showing how he breathes forth and how begets.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Beatrice began: "Give thanks, give thanks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the Sun of Angels, who to this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sensible one has raised thee by his grace!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never was heart of mortal so disposed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To worship, nor to give itself to God</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all its gratitude was it so ready,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As at those words did I myself become;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all my love was so absorbed in Him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in oblivion Beatrice was eclipsed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor this displeased her; but she smiled at it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the splendour of her laughing eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My single mind on many things divided.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lights many saw I, vivid and triumphant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make us a centre and themselves a circle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More sweet in voice than luminous in aspect.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus girt about the daughter of Latona</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We sometimes see, when pregnant is the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that it holds the thread which makes her zone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within the court of Heaven, whence I return,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are many jewels found, so fair and precious</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They cannot be transported from the realm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of them was the singing of those lights.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who takes not wings that he may fly up thither,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The tidings thence may from the dumb await!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as singing thus those burning suns</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had round about us whirled themselves three times,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like unto stars neighbouring the steadfast poles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ladies they seemed, not from the dance released,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But who stop short, in silence listening</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till they have gathered the new melody.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And within one I heard beginning: "When</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The radiance of grace, by which is kindled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">True love, and which thereafter grows by loving,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within thee multiplied is so resplendent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it conducts thee upward by that stair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where without reascending none descends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who should deny the wine out of his vial</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto thy thirst, in liberty were not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Except as water which descends not seaward.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fain wouldst thou know with what plants is enflowered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This garland that encircles with delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Lady fair who makes thee strong for heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the lambs was I of the holy flock</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Dominic conducteth by a road</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where well one fattens if he strayeth not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who is nearest to me on the right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My brother and master was; and he Albertus</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is of Cologne, I Thomas of Aquinum.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou of all the others wouldst be certain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Follow behind my speaking with thy sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upward along the blessed garland turning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That next effulgence issues from the smile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Gratian, who assisted both the courts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In such wise that it pleased in Paradise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other which near by adorns our choir</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Peter was who, e'en as the poor widow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Offered his treasure unto Holy Church.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fifth light, that among us is the fairest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Breathes forth from such a love, that all the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Below is greedy to learn tidings of it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within it is the lofty mind, where knowledge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So deep was put, that, if the true be true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see so much there never rose a second.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou seest next the lustre of that taper,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in the flesh below looked most within</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The angelic nature and its ministry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within that other little light is smiling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The advocate of the Christian centuries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of whose rhetoric Augustine was furnished.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now if thou trainest thy mind's eye along</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From light to light pursuant of my praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With thirst already of the eighth thou waitest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By seeing every good therein exults</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sainted soul, which the fallacious world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Makes manifest to him who listeneth well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The body whence 'twas hunted forth is lying</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down in Cieldauro, and from martyrdom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And banishment it came unto this peace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See farther onward flame the burning breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Isidore, of Beda, and of Richard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who was in contemplation more than man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This, whence to me returneth thy regard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The light is of a spirit unto whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his grave meditations death seemed slow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is the light eternal of Sigier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, reading lectures in the Street of Straw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did syllogize invidious verities."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, as a horologe that calleth us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What time the Bride of God is rising up</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With matins to her Spouse that he may love her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein one part the other draws and urges,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ting! ting! resounding with so sweet a note,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That swells with love the spirit well disposed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus I beheld the glorious wheel move round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And render voice to voice, in modulation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sweetness that can not be comprehended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Excepting there where joy is made eternal.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto XI</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O Thou insensate care of mortal men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How inconclusive are the syllogisms</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That make thee beat thy wings in downward flight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One after laws and one to aphorisms</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was going, and one following the priesthood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And one to reign by force or sophistry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one in theft, and one in state affairs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One in the pleasures of the flesh involved</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wearied himself, one gave himself to ease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I, from all these things emancipate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Beatrice above there in the Heavens</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such exceeding glory was received!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When each one had returned unto that point</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within the circle where it was before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It stood as in a candlestick a candle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from within the effulgence which at first</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had spoken unto me, I heard begin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Smiling while it more luminous became:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Even as I am kindled in its ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, looking into the Eternal Light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The occasion of thy thoughts I apprehend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou doubtest, and wouldst have me to resift</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In language so extended and so open</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My speech, that to thy sense it may be plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where just before I said, 'where well one fattens,'</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And where I said, 'there never rose a second;'</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And here 'tis needful we distinguish well.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Providence, which governeth the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With counsel, wherein all created vision</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is vanquished ere it reach unto the bottom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(So that towards her own Beloved might go</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bride of Him who, uttering a loud cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Espoused her with his consecrated blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Self-confident and unto Him more faithful,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two Princes did ordain in her behoof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which on this side and that might be her guide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The one was all seraphical in ardour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other by his wisdom upon earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A splendour was of light cherubical.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One will I speak of, for of both is spoken</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In praising one, whichever may be taken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because unto one end their labours were.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between Tupino and the stream that falls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down from the hill elect of blessed Ubald,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A fertile slope of lofty mountain hangs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From which Perugia feels the cold and heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through Porta Sole, and behind it weep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gualdo and Nocera their grievous yoke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From out that slope, there where it breaketh most</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its steepness, rose upon the world a sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As this one does sometimes from out the Ganges;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore let him who speaketh of that place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Say not Ascesi, for he would say little,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Orient, if he properly would speak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was not yet far distant from his rising</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before he had begun to make the earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some comfort from his mighty virtue feel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he in youth his father's wrath incurred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For certain Dame, to whom, as unto death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gate of pleasure no one doth unlock;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And was before his spiritual court</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'Et coram patre' unto her united;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then day by day more fervently he loved her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She, reft of her first husband, scorned, obscure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One thousand and one hundred years and more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Waited without a suitor till he came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Naught it availed to hear, that with Amyclas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Found her unmoved at sounding of his voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He who struck terror into all the world;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Naught it availed being constant and undaunted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that, when Mary still remained below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She mounted up with Christ upon the cross.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that too darkly I may not proceed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Francis and Poverty for these two lovers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Take thou henceforward in my speech diffuse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their concord and their joyous semblances,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The love, the wonder, and the sweet regard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They made to be the cause of holy thoughts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much so that the venerable Bernard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First bared his feet, and after so great peace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ran, and, in running, thought himself too slow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O wealth unknown!  O veritable good!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Giles bares his feet, and bares his feet Sylvester</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behind the bridegroom, so doth please the bride!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then goes his way that father and that master,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He and his Lady and that family</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which now was girding on the humble cord;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor cowardice of heart weighed down his brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At being son of Peter Bernardone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor for appearing marvellously scorned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But regally his hard determination</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Innocent he opened, and from him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Received the primal seal upon his Order.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the people mendicant increased</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behind this man, whose admirable life</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Better in glory of the heavens were sung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Incoronated with a second crown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was through Honorius by the Eternal Spirit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The holy purpose of this Archimandrite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when he had, through thirst of martyrdom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the proud presence of the Sultan preached</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Christ and the others who came after him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, finding for conversion too unripe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The folk, and not to tarry there in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Returned to fruit of the Italic grass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the rude rock 'twixt Tiber and the Arno</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Christ did he receive the final seal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which during two whole years his members bore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When He, who chose him unto so much good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was pleased to draw him up to the reward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he had merited by being lowly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto his friars, as to the rightful heirs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His most dear Lady did he recommend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bade that they should love her faithfully;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from her bosom the illustrious soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wished to depart, returning to its realm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for its body wished no other bier.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Think now what man was he, who was a fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Companion over the high seas to keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bark of Peter to its proper bearings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this man was our Patriarch; hence whoever</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth follow him as he commands can see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he is laden with good merchandise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for new pasturage his flock has grown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So greedy, that it is impossible</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They be not scattered over fields diverse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in proportion as his sheep remote</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vagabond go farther off from him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More void of milk return they to the fold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Verily some there are that fear a hurt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And keep close to the shepherd; but so few,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That little cloth doth furnish forth their hoods.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now if my utterance be not indistinct,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thine own hearing hath attentive been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thou recall to mind what I have said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In part contented shall thy wishes be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thou shalt see the plant that's chipped away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the rebuke that lieth in the words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'Where well one fattens, if he strayeth not.'"</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto XII</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Soon as the blessed flame had taken up</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The final word to give it utterance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began the holy millstone to revolve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in its gyre had not turned wholly round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before another in a ring enclosed it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And motion joined to motion, song to song;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Song that as greatly doth transcend our Muses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our Sirens, in those dulcet clarions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As primal splendour that which is reflected.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as are spanned athwart a tender cloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two rainbows parallel and like in colour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Juno to her handmaid gives command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(The one without born of the one within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to the speaking of that vagrant one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom love consumed as doth the sun the vapours,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make the people here, through covenant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">God set with Noah, presageful of the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shall no more be covered with a flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In such wise of those sempiternal roses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The garlands twain encompassed us about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thus the outer to the inner answered.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the dance, and other grand rejoicings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both of the singing, and the flaming forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Effulgence with effulgence blithe and tender,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Together, at once, with one accord had stopped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Even as the eyes, that, as volition moves them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must needs together shut and lift themselves,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of the heart of one of the new lights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There came a voice, that needle to the star</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made me appear in turning thitherward.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it began: "The love that makes me fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Draws me to speak about the other leader,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By whom so well is spoken here of mine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'Tis right, where one is, to bring in the other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, as they were united in their warfare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Together likewise may their glory shine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soldiery of Christ, which it had cost</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So dear to arm again, behind the standard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Moved slow and doubtful and in numbers few,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the Emperor who reigneth evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Provided for the host that was in peril,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through grace alone and not that it was worthy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as was said, he to his Bride brought succour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With champions twain, at whose deed, at whose word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The straggling people were together drawn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within that region where the sweet west wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rises to open the new leaves, wherewith</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Europe is seen to clothe herself afresh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not far off from the beating of the waves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behind which in his long career the sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes conceals himself from every man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is situate the fortunate Calahorra,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under protection of the mighty shield</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the Lion subject is and sovereign.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therein was born the amorous paramour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Christian Faith, the athlete consecrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kind to his own and cruel to his foes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when it was created was his mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Replete with such a living energy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in his mother her it made prophetic.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as the espousals were complete</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Between him and the Faith at holy font,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they with mutual safety dowered each other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The woman, who for him had given assent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saw in a dream the admirable fruit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That issue would from him and from his heirs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that he might be construed as he was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A spirit from this place went forth to name him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With His possessive whose he wholly was.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dominic was he called; and him I speak of</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as of the husbandman whom Christ</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Elected to his garden to assist him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Envoy and servant sooth he seemed of Christ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the first love made manifest in him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was the first counsel that was given by Christ.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silent and wakeful many a time was he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Discovered by his nurse upon the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he would have said, 'For this I came.'</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O thou his father, Felix verily!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O thou his mother, verily Joanna,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If this, interpreted, means as is said!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not for the world which people toil for now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In following Ostiense and Taddeo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But through his longing after the true manna,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He in short time became so great a teacher,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he began to go about the vineyard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which fadeth soon, if faithless be the dresser;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of the See, (that once was more benignant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the righteous poor, not through itself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But him who sits there and degenerates,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to dispense or two or three for six,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not any fortune of first vacancy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'Non decimas quae sunt pauperum Dei,'</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He asked for, but against the errant world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Permission to do battle for the seed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which these four and twenty plants surround thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with the doctrine and the will together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With office apostolical he moved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like torrent which some lofty vein out-presses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in among the shoots heretical</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His impetus with greater fury smote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherever the resistance was the greatest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of him were made thereafter divers runnels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby the garden catholic is watered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that more living its plantations stand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If such the one wheel of the Biga was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the Holy Church itself defended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the field its civic battle won,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Truly full manifest should be to thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The excellence of the other, unto whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thomas so courteous was before my coming.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still the orbit, which the highest part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of its circumference made, is derelict,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the mould is where was once the crust.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His family, that had straight forward moved</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With feet upon his footprints, are turned round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that they set the point upon the heel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soon aware they will be of the harvest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this bad husbandry, when shall the tares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Complain the granary is taken from them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet say I, he who searcheth leaf by leaf</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our volume through, would still some page discover</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he could read, 'I am as I am wont.'</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'Twill not be from Casal nor Acquasparta,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whence come such unto the written word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That one avoids it, and the other narrows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bonaventura of Bagnoregio's life</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Am I, who always in great offices</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Postponed considerations sinister.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here are Illuminato and Agostino,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who of the first barefooted beggars were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the cord the friends of God became.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hugh of Saint Victor is among them here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Peter Mangiador, and Peter of Spain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who down below in volumes twelve is shining;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nathan the seer, and metropolitan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chrysostom, and Anselmus, and Donatus</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who deigned to lay his hand to the first art;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here is Rabanus, and beside me here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shines the Calabrian Abbot Joachim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He with the spirit of prophecy endowed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To celebrate so great a paladin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have moved me the impassioned courtesy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the discreet discourses of Friar Thomas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with me they have moved this company."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto XIII</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Let him imagine, who would well conceive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What now I saw, and let him while I speak</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Retain the image as a steadfast rock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fifteen stars, that in their divers regions</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sky enliven with a light so great</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it transcends all clusters of the air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him the Wain imagine unto which</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our vault of heaven sufficeth night and day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that in turning of its pole it fails not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him the mouth imagine of the horn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in the point beginneth of the axis</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Round about which the primal wheel revolves,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have fashioned of themselves two signs in heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like unto that which Minos' daughter made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The moment when she felt the frost of death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one to have its rays within the other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both to whirl themselves in such a manner</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That one should forward go, the other backward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he will have some shadowing forth of that</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">True constellation and the double dance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That circled round the point at which I was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because it is as much beyond our wont,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As swifter than the motion of the Chiana</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Moveth the heaven that all the rest outspeeds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There sang they neither Bacchus, nor Apollo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in the divine nature Persons three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in one person the divine and human.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The singing and the dance fulfilled their measure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto us those holy lights gave need,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Growing in happiness from care to care.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then broke the silence of those saints concordant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The light in which the admirable life</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of God's own mendicant was told to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said: "Now that one straw is trodden out</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now that its seed is garnered up already,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweet love invites me to thresh out the other.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into that bosom, thou believest, whence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was drawn the rib to form the beauteous cheek</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose taste to all the world is costing dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And into that which, by the lance transfixed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before and since, such satisfaction made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it weighs down the balance of all sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whate'er of light it has to human nature</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Been lawful to possess was all infused</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the same power that both of them created;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hence at what I said above dost wonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I narrated that no second had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The good which in the fifth light is enclosed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now ope thine eyes to what I answer thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thou shalt see thy creed and my discourse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fit in the truth as centre in a circle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That which can die, and that which dieth not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are nothing but the splendour of the idea</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which by his love our Lord brings into being;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because that living Light, which from its fount</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Effulgent flows, so that it disunites not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Him nor from the Love in them intrined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through its own goodness reunites its rays</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In nine subsistences, as in a mirror,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Itself eternally remaining One.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thence it descends to the last potencies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downward from act to act becoming such</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That only brief contingencies it makes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And these contingencies I hold to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Things generated, which the heaven produces</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By its own motion, with seed and without.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neither their wax, nor that which tempers it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remains immutable, and hence beneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ideal signet more and less shines through;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore it happens, that the selfsame tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After its kind bears worse and better fruit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ye are born with characters diverse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If in perfection tempered were the wax,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And were the heaven in its supremest virtue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The brilliance of the seal would all appear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But nature gives it evermore deficient,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the like manner working as the artist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who has the skill of art and hand that trembles.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If then the fervent Love, the Vision clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of primal Virtue do dispose and seal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perfection absolute is there acquired.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus was of old the earth created worthy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all and every animal perfection;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thus the Virgin was impregnate made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that thine own opinion I commend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That human nature never yet has been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor will be, what it was in those two persons.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now if no farther forth I should proceed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'Then in what way was he without a peer?'</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would be the first beginning of thy words.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, that may well appear what now appears not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Think who he was, and what occasion moved him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make request, when it was told him, 'Ask.'</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I've not so spoken that thou canst not see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Clearly he was a king who asked for wisdom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he might be sufficiently a king;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'Twas not to know the number in which are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The motors here above, or if 'necesse'</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a contingent e'er 'necesse' make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'Non si est dare primum motum esse,'</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or if in semicircle can be made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Triangle so that it have no right angle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence, if thou notest this and what I said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A regal prudence is that peerless seeing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the shaft of my intention strikes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if on 'rose' thou turnest thy clear eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou'lt see that it has reference alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To kings who're many, and the good are rare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With this distinction take thou what I said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thus it can consist with thy belief</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the first father and of our Delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lead shall this be always to thy feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make thee, like a weary man, move slowly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both to the Yes and No thou seest not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For very low among the fools is he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who affirms without distinction, or denies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As well in one as in the other case;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because it happens that full often bends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Current opinion in the false direction,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then the feelings bind the intellect.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far more than uselessly he leaves the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Since he returneth not the same he went,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who fishes for the truth, and has no skill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the world proofs manifest thereof</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Parmenides, Melissus, Brissus are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many who went on and knew not whither;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus did Sabellius, Arius, and those fools</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who have been even as swords unto the Scriptures</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In rendering distorted their straight faces.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor yet shall people be too confident</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In judging, even as he is who doth count</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The corn in field or ever it be ripe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I have seen all winter long the thorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First show itself intractable and fierce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after bear the rose upon its top;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I have seen a ship direct and swift</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Run o'er the sea throughout its course entire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To perish at the harbour's mouth at last.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let not Dame Bertha nor Ser Martin think,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing one steal, another offering make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see them in the arbitrament divine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one may rise, and fall the other may."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto XIV</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>From centre unto rim, from rim to centre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a round vase the water moves itself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As from without 'tis struck or from within.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into my mind upon a sudden dropped</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What I am saying, at the moment when</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Silent became the glorious life of Thomas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because of the resemblance that was born</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his discourse and that of Beatrice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom, after him, it pleased thus to begin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"This man has need (and does not tell you so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor with the voice, nor even in his thought)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of going to the root of one truth more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Declare unto him if the light wherewith</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blossoms your substance shall remain with you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eternally the same that it is now;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if it do remain, say in what manner,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After ye are again made visible,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It can be that it injure not your sight."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As by a greater gladness urged and drawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They who are dancing in a ring sometimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uplift their voices and their motions quicken;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, at that orison devout and prompt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The holy circles a new joy displayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In their revolving and their wondrous song.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whoso lamenteth him that here we die</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That we may live above, has never there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seen the refreshment of the eternal rain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The One and Two and Three who ever liveth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And reigneth ever in Three and Two and One,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not circumscribed and all things circumscribing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three several times was chanted by each one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among those spirits, with such melody</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That for all merit it were just reward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in the lustre most divine of all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lesser ring, I heard a modest voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as perhaps the Angel's was to Mary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Answer: "As long as the festivity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Paradise shall be, so long our love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall radiate round about us such a vesture.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its brightness is proportioned to the ardour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ardour to the vision; and the vision</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Equals what grace it has above its worth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, glorious and sanctified, our flesh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is reassumed, then shall our persons be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More pleasing by their being all complete;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For will increase whate'er bestows on us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of light gratuitous the Good Supreme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Light which enables us to look on Him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore the vision must perforce increase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Increase the ardour which from that is kindled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Increase the radiance which from this proceeds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But even as a coal that sends forth flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by its vivid whiteness overpowers it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that its own appearance it maintains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus the effulgence that surrounds us now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall be o'erpowered in aspect by the flesh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which still to-day the earth doth cover up;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor can so great a splendour weary us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For strong will be the organs of the body</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To everything which hath the power to please us."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So sudden and alert appeared to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both one and the other choir to say Amen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That well they showed desire for their dead bodies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor sole for them perhaps, but for the mothers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fathers, and the rest who had been dear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ever they became eternal flames.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo! all round about of equal brightness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arose a lustre over what was there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like an horizon that is clearing up.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as at rise of early eve begin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the welkin new appearances,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the sight seems real and unreal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seemed to me that new subsistences</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began there to be seen, and make a circle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Outside the other two circumferences.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O very sparkling of the Holy Spirit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How sudden and incandescent it became</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto mine eyes, that vanquished bore it not!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Beatrice so beautiful and smiling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Appeared to me, that with the other sights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That followed not my memory I must leave her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to uplift themselves mine eyes resumed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The power, and I beheld myself translated</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To higher salvation with my Lady only.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well was I ware that I was more uplifted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the enkindled smiling of the star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemed to me more ruddy than its wont.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all my heart, and in that dialect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is the same in all, such holocaust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To God I made as the new grace beseemed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not yet from my bosom was exhausted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ardour of sacrifice, before I knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This offering was accepted and auspicious;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For with so great a lustre and so red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Splendours appeared to me in twofold rays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I said: "O Helios who dost so adorn them!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as distinct with less and greater lights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Glimmers between the two poles of the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Galaxy that maketh wise men doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus constellated in the depths of Mars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those rays described the venerable sign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That quadrants joining in a circle make.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here doth my memory overcome my genius;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For on that cross as levin gleamed forth Christ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that I cannot find ensample worthy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he who takes his cross and follows Christ</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Again will pardon me what I omit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing in that aurora lighten Christ.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From horn to horn, and 'twixt the top and base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lights were in motion, brightly scintillating</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As they together met and passed each other;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus level and aslant and swift and slow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We here behold, renewing still the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The particles of bodies long and short,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Across the sunbeam move, wherewith is listed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes the shade, which for their own defence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">People with cunning and with art contrive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as a lute and harp, accordant strung</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With many strings, a dulcet tinkling make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him by whom the notes are not distinguished,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So from the lights that there to me appeared</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upgathered through the cross a melody,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which rapt me, not distinguishing the hymn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well was I ware it was of lofty laud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because there came to me, "Arise and conquer!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As unto him who hears and comprehends not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much enamoured I became therewith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That until then there was not anything</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That e'er had fettered me with such sweet bonds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps my word appears somewhat too bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Postponing the delight of those fair eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into which gazing my desire has rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But who bethinks him that the living seals</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of every beauty grow in power ascending,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that I there had not turned round to those,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can me excuse, if I myself accuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To excuse myself, and see that I speak truly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For here the holy joy is not disclosed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because ascending it becomes more pure.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto XV</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>A will benign, in which reveals itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ever the love that righteously inspires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in the iniquitous, cupidity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silence imposed upon that dulcet lyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And quieted the consecrated chords,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Heaven's right hand doth tighten and relax.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How unto just entreaties shall be deaf</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those substances, which, to give me desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of praying them, with one accord grew silent?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'Tis well that without end he should lament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who for the love of thing that doth not last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eternally despoils him of that love!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As through the pure and tranquil evening air</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There shoots from time to time a sudden fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Moving the eyes that steadfast were before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seems to be a star that changeth place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Except that in the part where it is kindled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nothing is missed, and this endureth little;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So from the horn that to the right extends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto that cross's foot there ran a star</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the constellation shining there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor was the gem dissevered from its ribbon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But down the radiant fillet ran along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that fire seemed it behind alabaster.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus piteous did Anchises' shade reach forward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If any faith our greatest Muse deserve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When in Elysium he his son perceived.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"O sanguis meus, O superinfusa</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gratia Dei, sicut tibi, cui</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bis unquam Coeli janua reclusa?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus that effulgence; whence I gave it heed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then round unto my Lady turned my sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on this side and that was stupefied;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in her eyes was burning such a smile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with mine own methought I touched the bottom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both of my grace and of my Paradise!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, pleasant to the hearing and the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The spirit joined to its beginning things</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I understood not, so profound it spake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor did it hide itself from me by choice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by necessity; for its conception</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the mark of mortals set itself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when the bow of burning sympathy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was so far slackened, that its speech descended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towards the mark of our intelligence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first thing that was understood by me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was "Benedight be Thou, O Trine and One,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who hast unto my seed so courteous been!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it continued: "Hunger long and grateful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drawn from the reading of the mighty volume</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein is never changed the white nor dark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast appeased, my son, within this light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which I speak to thee, by grace of her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who to this lofty flight with plumage clothed thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou thinkest that to me thy thought doth pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Him who is the first, as from the unit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If that be known, ray out the five and six;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore who I am thou askest not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And why I seem more joyous unto thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than any other of this gladsome crowd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou think'st the truth; because the small and great</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this existence look into the mirror</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein, before thou think'st, thy thought thou showest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that the sacred love, in which I watch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sight perpetual, and which makes me thirst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sweet desire, may better be fulfilled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now let thy voice secure and frank and glad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proclaim the wishes, the desire proclaim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which my answer is decreed already."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Beatrice I turned me, and she heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before I spake, and smiled to me a sign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made the wings of my desire increase;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then in this wise began I: "Love and knowledge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When on you dawned the first Equality,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the same weight for each of you became;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in the Sun, which lighted you and burned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With heat and radiance, they so equal are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all similitudes are insufficient.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But among mortals will and argument,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For reason that to you is manifest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Diversely feathered in their pinions are.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence I, who mortal am, feel in myself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This inequality; so give not thanks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save in my heart, for this paternal welcome.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Truly do I entreat thee, living topaz!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Set in this precious jewel as a gem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thou wilt satisfy me with thy name."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"O leaf of mine, in whom I pleasure took</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">E'en while awaiting, I was thine own root!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such a beginning he in answer made me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then said to me: "That one from whom is named</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy race, and who a hundred years and more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has circled round the mount on the first cornice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A son of mine and thy great-grandsire was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well it behoves thee that the long fatigue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou shouldst for him make shorter with thy works.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Florence, within the ancient boundary</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From which she taketh still her tierce and nones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abode in quiet, temperate and chaste.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No golden chain she had, nor coronal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor ladies shod with sandal shoon, nor girdle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That caught the eye more than the person did.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not yet the daughter at her birth struck fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the father, for the time and dower</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did not o'errun this side or that the measure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No houses had she void of families,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not yet had thither come Sardanapalus</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To show what in a chamber can be done;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not yet surpassed had Montemalo been</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By your Uccellatojo, which surpassed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall in its downfall be as in its rise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bellincion Berti saw I go begirt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With leather and with bone, and from the mirror</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dame depart without a painted face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him of Nerli saw, and him of Vecchio,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Contented with their simple suits of buff</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the spindle and the flax their dames.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O fortunate women! and each one was certain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her own burial-place, and none as yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sake of France was in her bed deserted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One o'er the cradle kept her studious watch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her lullaby the language used</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That first delights the fathers and the mothers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another, drawing tresses from her distaff,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Told o'er among her family the tales</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Trojans and of Fesole and Rome.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As great a marvel then would have been held</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Lapo Salterello, a Cianghella,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Cincinnatus or Cornelia now.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To such a quiet, such a beautiful</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Life of the citizen, to such a safe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Community, and to so sweet an inn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did Mary give me, with loud cries invoked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in your ancient Baptistery at once</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Christian and Cacciaguida I became.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moronto was my brother, and Eliseo;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Val di Pado came to me my wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from that place thy surname was derived.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I followed afterward the Emperor Conrad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he begirt me of his chivalry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much I pleased him with my noble deeds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I followed in his train against that law's</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Iniquity, whose people doth usurp</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your just possession, through your Pastor's fault.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There by that execrable race was I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Released from bonds of the fallacious world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The love of which defileth many souls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And came from martyrdom unto this peace."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto XVI</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O thou our poor nobility of blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thou dost make the people glory in thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down here where our affection languishes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A marvellous thing it ne'er will be to me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For there where appetite is not perverted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I say in Heaven, of thee I made a boast!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Truly thou art a cloak that quickly shortens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that unless we piece thee day by day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Time goeth round about thee with his shears!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With 'You,' which Rome was first to tolerate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Wherein her family less perseveres,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet once again my words beginning made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence Beatrice, who stood somewhat apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Smiling, appeared like unto her who coughed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At the first failing writ of Guenever.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I began: "You are my ancestor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You give to me all hardihood to speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You lift me so that I am more than I.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So many rivulets with gladness fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My mind, that of itself it makes a joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because it can endure this and not burst.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then tell me, my beloved root ancestral,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who were your ancestors, and what the years</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in your boyhood chronicled themselves?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me about the sheepfold of Saint John,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How large it was, and who the people were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within it worthy of the highest seats."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As at the blowing of the winds a coal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quickens to flame, so I beheld that light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Become resplendent at my blandishments.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as unto mine eyes it grew more fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With voice more sweet and tender, but not in</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This modern dialect, it said to me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"From uttering of the 'Ave,' till the birth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which my mother, who is now a saint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of me was lightened who had been her burden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto its Lion had this fire returned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Five hundred fifty times and thirty more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To reinflame itself beneath his paw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My ancestors and I our birthplace had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where first is found the last ward of the city</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By him who runneth in your annual game.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suffice it of my elders to hear this;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But who they were, and whence they thither came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Silence is more considerate than speech.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All those who at that time were there between</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mars and the Baptist, fit for bearing arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were a fifth part of those who now are living;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the community, that now is mixed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Campi and Certaldo and Figghine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pure in the lowest artisan was seen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O how much better 'twere to have as neighbours</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The folk of whom I speak, and at Galluzzo</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at Trespiano have your boundary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than have them in the town, and bear the stench</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Aguglione's churl, and him of Signa</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who has sharp eyes for trickery already.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had not the folk, which most of all the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Degenerates, been a step-dame unto Caesar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But as a mother to her son benignant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some who turn Florentines, and trade and discount,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would have gone back again to Simifonte</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where their grandsires went about as beggars.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Montemurlo still would be the Counts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Cerchi in the parish of Acone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps in Valdigrieve the Buondelmonti.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever the intermingling of the people</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has been the source of malady in cities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in the body food it surfeits on;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a blind bull more headlong plunges down</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than a blind lamb; and very often cuts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Better and more a single sword than five.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Luni thou regard, and Urbisaglia,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How they have passed away, and how are passing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chiusi and Sinigaglia after them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hear how races waste themselves away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will seem to thee no novel thing nor hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing that even cities have an end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All things of yours have their mortality,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as yourselves; but it is hidden in some</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That a long while endure, and lives are short;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as the turning of the lunar heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Covers and bares the shores without a pause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the like manner fortune does with Florence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore should not appear a marvellous thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What I shall say of the great Florentines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom the fame is hidden in the Past.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw the Ughi, saw the Catellini,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Filippi, Greci, Ormanni, and Alberichi,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even in their fall illustrious citizens;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saw, as mighty as they ancient were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With him of La Sannella him of Arca,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Soldanier, Ardinghi, and Bostichi.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Near to the gate that is at present laden</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a new felony of so much weight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That soon it shall be jetsam from the bark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Ravignani were, from whom descended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The County Guido, and whoe'er the name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the great Bellincione since hath taken.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He of La Pressa knew the art of ruling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Already, and already Galigajo</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had hilt and pommel gilded in his house.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mighty already was the Column Vair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sacchetti, Giuochi, Fifant, and Barucci,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Galli, and they who for the bushel blush.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stock from which were the Calfucci born</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was great already, and already chosen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To curule chairs the Sizii and Arrigucci.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O how beheld I those who are undone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By their own pride! and how the Balls of Gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Florence enflowered in all their mighty deeds!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So likewise did the ancestors of those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who evermore, when vacant is your church,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fatten by staying in consistory.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The insolent race, that like a dragon follows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whoever flees, and unto him that shows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His teeth or purse is gentle as a lamb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already rising was, but from low people;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that it pleased not Ubertin Donato</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his wife's father should make him their kin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already had Caponsacco to the Market</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Fesole descended, and already</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Giuda and Infangato were good burghers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I'll tell a thing incredible, but true;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One entered the small circuit by a gate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which from the Della Pera took its name!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each one that bears the beautiful escutcheon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the great baron whose renown and name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The festival of Thomas keepeth fresh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knighthood and privilege from him received;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though with the populace unites himself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To-day the man who binds it with a border.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already were Gualterotti and Importuni;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And still more quiet would the Borgo be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If with new neighbours it remained unfed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The house from which is born your lamentation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through just disdain that death among you brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And put an end unto your joyous life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was honoured in itself and its companions.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O Buondelmonte, how in evil hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou fled'st the bridal at another's promptings!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many would be rejoicing who are sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If God had thee surrendered to the Ema</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The first time that thou camest to the city.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But it behoved the mutilated stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which guards the bridge, that Florence should provide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A victim in her latest hour of peace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all these families, and others with them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Florence beheld I in so great repose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That no occasion had she whence to weep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all these families beheld so just</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And glorious her people, that the lily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Never upon the spear was placed reversed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor by division was vermilion made."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto XVII</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>As came to Clymene, to be made certain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that which he had heard against himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He who makes fathers chary still to children,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even such was I, and such was I perceived</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Beatrice and by the holy light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That first on my account had changed its place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore my Lady said to me: "Send forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flame of thy desire, so that it issue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Imprinted well with the internal stamp;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not that our knowledge may be greater made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By speech of thine, but to accustom thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell thy thirst, that we may give thee drink."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"O my beloved tree, (that so dost lift thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That even as minds terrestrial perceive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No triangle containeth two obtuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thou beholdest the contingent things</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere in themselves they are, fixing thine eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the point in which all times are present,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While I was with Virgilius conjoined</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the mountain that the souls doth heal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when descending into the dead world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were spoken to me of my future life</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some grievous words; although I feel myself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sooth foursquare against the blows of chance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On this account my wish would be content</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hear what fortune is approaching me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because foreseen an arrow comes more slowly."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus did I say unto that selfsame light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That unto me had spoken before; and even</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Beatrice willed was my own will confessed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not in vague phrase, in which the foolish folk</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ensnared themselves of old, ere yet was slain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Lamb of God who taketh sins away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with clear words and unambiguous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Language responded that paternal love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hid and revealed by its own proper smile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Contingency, that outside of the volume</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of your materiality extends not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is all depicted in the eternal aspect.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Necessity however thence it takes not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Except as from the eye, in which 'tis mirrored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A ship that with the current down descends.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thence, e'en as there cometh to the ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweet harmony from an organ, comes in sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To me the time that is preparing for thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As forth from Athens went Hippolytus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By reason of his step-dame false and cruel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So thou from Florence must perforce depart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already this is willed, and this is sought for;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soon it shall be done by him who thinks it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where every day the Christ is bought and sold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blame shall follow the offended party</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In outcry as is usual; but the vengeance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall witness to the truth that doth dispense it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt abandon everything beloved</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most tenderly, and this the arrow is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which first the bow of banishment shoots forth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt have proof how savoureth of salt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bread of others, and how hard a road</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The going down and up another's stairs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that which most shall weigh upon thy shoulders</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will be the bad and foolish company</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which into this valley thou shalt fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all ingrate, all mad and impious</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will they become against thee; but soon after</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They, and not thou, shall have the forehead scarlet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their bestiality their own proceedings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall furnish proof; so 'twill be well for thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A party to have made thee by thyself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine earliest refuge and thine earliest inn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall be the mighty Lombard's courtesy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who on the Ladder bears the holy bird,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who such benign regard shall have for thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That 'twixt you twain, in doing and in asking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shall be first which is with others last.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With him shalt thou see one who at his birth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has by this star of strength been so impressed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That notable shall his achievements be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not yet the people are aware of him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through his young age, since only nine years yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Around about him have these wheels revolved.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ere the Gascon cheat the noble Henry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some sparkles of his virtue shall appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In caring not for silver nor for toil.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So recognized shall his magnificence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Become hereafter, that his enemies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will not have power to keep mute tongues about it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On him rely, and on his benefits;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By him shall many people be transformed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Changing condition rich and mendicant;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And written in thy mind thou hence shalt bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of him, but shalt not say it"—and things said he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Incredible to those who shall be present.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then added: "Son, these are the commentaries</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On what was said to thee; behold the snares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That are concealed behind few revolutions;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet would I not thy neighbours thou shouldst envy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because thy life into the future reaches</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beyond the punishment of their perfidies."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When by its silence showed that sainted soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it had finished putting in the woof</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into that web which I had given it warped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Began I, even as he who yearneth after,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being in doubt, some counsel from a person</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who seeth, and uprightly wills, and loves:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Well see I, father mine, how spurreth on</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The time towards me such a blow to deal me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As heaviest is to him who most gives way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore with foresight it is well I arm me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, if the dearest place be taken from me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I may not lose the others by my songs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down through the world of infinite bitterness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And o'er the mountain, from whose beauteous summit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The eyes of my own Lady lifted me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And afterward through heaven from light to light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have learned that which, if I tell again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will be a savour of strong herbs to many.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if I am a timid friend to truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I fear lest I may lose my life with those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who will hereafter call this time the olden."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The light in which was smiling my own treasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which there I had discovered, flashed at first</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in the sunshine doth a golden mirror;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then made reply: "A conscience overcast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or with its own or with another's shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will taste forsooth the tartness of thy word;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ne'ertheless, all falsehood laid aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make manifest thy vision utterly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And let them scratch wherever is the itch;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For if thine utterance shall offensive be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At the first taste, a vital nutriment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'Twill leave thereafter, when it is digested.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This cry of thine shall do as doth the wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which smiteth most the most exalted summits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that is no slight argument of honour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore are shown to thee within these wheels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the mount and in the dolorous valley,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Only the souls that unto fame are known;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because the spirit of the hearer rests not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor doth confirm its faith by an example</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which has the root of it unknown and hidden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or other reason that is not apparent."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto XVIII</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Now was alone rejoicing in its word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That soul beatified, and I was tasting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My own, the bitter tempering with the sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Lady who to God was leading me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said: "Change thy thought; consider that I am</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Near unto Him who every wrong disburdens."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the loving accents of my comfort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I turned me round, and then what love I saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within those holy eyes I here relinquish;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not only that my language I distrust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that my mind cannot return so far</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above itself, unless another guide it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus much upon that point can I repeat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, her again beholding, my affection</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From every other longing was released.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the eternal pleasure, which direct</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rayed upon Beatrice, from her fair face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Contented me with its reflected aspect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conquering me with the radiance of a smile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She said to me, "Turn thee about and listen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not in mine eyes alone is Paradise."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as sometimes here do we behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The affection in the look, if it be such</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the soul is wrapt away by it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, by the flaming of the effulgence holy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which I turned, I recognized therein</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wish of speaking to me somewhat farther.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it began: "In this fifth resting-place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the tree that liveth by its summit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And aye bears fruit, and never loses leaf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are blessed spirits that below, ere yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They came to Heaven, were of such great renown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every Muse therewith would affluent be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore look thou upon the cross's horns;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He whom I now shall name will there enact</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What doth within a cloud its own swift fire."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw athwart the Cross a splendour drawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By naming Joshua, (even as he did it,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor noted I the word before the deed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the name of the great Maccabee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw another move itself revolving,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gladness was the whip unto that top.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Likewise for Charlemagne and for Orlando,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two of them my regard attentive followed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As followeth the eye its falcon flying.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>William thereafterward, and Renouard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the Duke Godfrey, did attract my sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along upon that Cross, and Robert Guiscard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, moved and mingled with the other lights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The soul that had addressed me showed how great</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An artist 'twas among the heavenly singers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To my right side I turned myself around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My duty to behold in Beatrice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Either by words or gesture signified;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so translucent I beheld her eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So full of pleasure, that her countenance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Surpassed its other and its latest wont.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as, by feeling greater delectation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A man in doing good from day to day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Becomes aware his virtue is increasing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So I became aware that my gyration</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With heaven together had increased its arc,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That miracle beholding more adorned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And such as is the change, in little lapse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of time, in a pale woman, when her face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is from the load of bashfulness unladen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such was it in mine eyes, when I had turned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Caused by the whiteness of the temperate star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sixth, which to itself had gathered me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within that Jovial torch did I behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sparkling of the love which was therein</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Delineate our language to mine eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even as birds uprisen from the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in congratulation o'er their food,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make squadrons of themselves, now round, now long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So from within those lights the holy creatures</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sang flying to and fro, and in their figures</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made of themselves now D, now I, now L.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First singing they to their own music moved;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then one becoming of these characters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little while they rested and were silent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O divine Pegasea, thou who genius</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dost glorious make, and render it long-lived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this through thee the cities and the kingdoms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Illume me with thyself, that I may bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their figures out as I have them conceived!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Apparent be thy power in these brief verses!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Themselves then they displayed in five times seven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vowels and consonants; and I observed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The parts as they seemed spoken unto me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'Diligite justitiam,' these were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First verb and noun of all that was depicted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'Qui judicatis terram' were the last.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereafter in the M of the fifth word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remained they so arranged, that Jupiter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemed to be silver there with gold inlaid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And other lights I saw descend where was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The summit of the M, and pause there singing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The good, I think, that draws them to itself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, as in striking upon burning logs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upward there fly innumerable sparks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence fools are wont to look for auguries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than a thousand lights seemed thence to rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to ascend, some more, and others less,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as the Sun that lights them had allotted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, each one being quiet in its place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The head and neck beheld I of an eagle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Delineated by that inlaid fire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who there paints has none to be his guide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Himself guides; and is from Him remembered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That virtue which is form unto the nest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other beatitude, that contented seemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At first to bloom a lily on the M,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By a slight motion followed out the imprint.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O gentle star! what and how many gems</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did demonstrate to me, that all our justice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Effect is of that heaven which thou ingemmest!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore I pray the Mind, in which begin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy motion and thy virtue, to regard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence comes the smoke that vitiates thy rays;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that a second time it now be wroth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With buying and with selling in the temple</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose walls were built with signs and martyrdoms!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O soldiery of heaven, whom I contemplate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Implore for those who are upon the earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All gone astray after the bad example!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once 'twas the custom to make war with swords;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now 'tis made by taking here and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bread the pitying Father shuts from none.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet thou, who writest but to cancel, think</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Peter and that Paul, who for this vineyard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which thou art spoiling died, are still alive!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well canst thou say: "So steadfast my desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is unto him who willed to live alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for a dance was led to martyrdom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I know not the Fisherman nor Paul."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto XIX</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Appeared before me with its wings outspread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The beautiful image that in sweet fruition</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made jubilant the interwoven souls;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appeared a little ruby each, wherein</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ray of the sun was burning so enkindled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That each into mine eyes refracted it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what it now behoves me to retrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor voice has e'er reported, nor ink written,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor was by fantasy e'er comprehended;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For speak I saw, and likewise heard, the beak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And utter with its voice both 'I' and 'My,'</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When in conception it was 'We' and 'Our.'</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it began: "Being just and merciful</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Am I exalted here unto that glory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which cannot be exceeded by desire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And upon earth I left my memory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such, that the evil-minded people there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Commend it, but continue not the story."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So doth a single heat from many embers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make itself felt, even as from many loves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Issued a single sound from out that image.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence I thereafter: "O perpetual flowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the eternal joy, that only one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make me perceive your odours manifold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exhaling, break within me the great fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which a long season has in hunger held me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not finding for it any food on earth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well do I know, that if in heaven its mirror</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Justice Divine another realm doth make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yours apprehends it not through any veil.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You know how I attentively address me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To listen; and you know what is the doubt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is in me so very old a fast."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as a falcon, issuing from his hood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth move his head, and with his wings applaud him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Showing desire, and making himself fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saw I become that standard, which of lauds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was interwoven of the grace divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such songs as he knows who there rejoices.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then it began: "He who a compass turned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the world's outer verge, and who within it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Devised so much occult and manifest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could not the impress of his power so make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On all the universe, as that his Word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should not remain in infinite excess.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this makes certain that the first proud being,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who was the paragon of every creature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By not awaiting light fell immature.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hence appears it, that each minor nature</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is scant receptacle unto that good</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which has no end, and by itself is measured.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In consequence our vision, which perforce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must be some ray of that intelligence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which all things whatever are replete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cannot in its own nature be so potent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it shall not its origin discern</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far beyond that which is apparent to it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore into the justice sempiternal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The power of vision that your world receives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As eye into the ocean, penetrates;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, though it see the bottom near the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the deep perceives it not, and yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'Tis there, but it is hidden by the depth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no light but comes from the serene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never is o'ercast, nay, it is darkness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or shadow of the flesh, or else its poison.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amply to thee is opened now the cavern</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which has concealed from thee the living justice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which thou mad'st such frequent questioning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For saidst thou: 'Born a man is on the shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Indus, and is none who there can speak</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Christ, nor who can read, nor who can write;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all his inclinations and his actions</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are good, so far as human reason sees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without a sin in life or in discourse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He dieth unbaptised and without faith;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where is this justice that condemneth him?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where is his fault, if he do not believe?'</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now who art thou, that on the bench wouldst sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In judgment at a thousand miles away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the short vision of a single span?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Truly to him who with me subtilizes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If so the Scripture were not over you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For doubting there were marvellous occasion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O animals terrene, O stolid minds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The primal will, that in itself is good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne'er from itself, the Good Supreme, has moved.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much is just as is accordant with it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No good created draws it to itself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But it, by raying forth, occasions that."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as above her nest goes circling round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The stork when she has fed her little ones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he who has been fed looks up at her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So lifted I my brows, and even such</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Became the blessed image, which its wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was moving, by so many counsels urged.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Circling around it sang, and said: "As are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My notes to thee, who dost not comprehend them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such is the eternal judgment to you mortals."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those lucent splendours of the Holy Spirit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grew quiet then, but still within the standard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made the Romans reverend to the world.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It recommenced: "Unto this kingdom never</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ascended one who had not faith in Christ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before or since he to the tree was nailed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But look thou, many crying are, 'Christ, Christ!'</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who at the judgment shall be far less near</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him than some shall be who knew not Christ.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such Christians shall the Ethiop condemn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the two companies shall be divided,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one for ever rich, the other poor.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What to your kings may not the Persians say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When they that volume opened shall behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which are written down all their dispraises?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There shall be seen, among the deeds of Albert,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That which ere long shall set the pen in motion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which the realm of Prague shall be deserted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There shall be seen the woe that on the Seine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He brings by falsifying of the coin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who by the blow of a wild boar shall die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There shall be seen the pride that causes thirst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which makes the Scot and Englishman so mad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they within their boundaries cannot rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be seen the luxury and effeminate life</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of him of Spain, and the Bohemian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who valour never knew and never wished;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be seen the Cripple of Jerusalem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His goodness represented by an I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While the reverse an M shall represent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be seen the avarice and poltroonery</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of him who guards the Island of the Fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein Anchises finished his long life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to declare how pitiful he is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall be his record in contracted letters</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which shall make note of much in little space.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shall appear to each one the foul deeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of uncle and of brother who a nation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So famous have dishonoured, and two crowns.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he of Portugal and he of Norway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall there be known, and he of Rascia too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who saw in evil hour the coin of Venice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O happy Hungary, if she let herself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be wronged no farther! and Navarre the happy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If with the hills that gird her she be armed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And each one may believe that now, as hansel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereof, do Nicosia and Famagosta</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lament and rage because of their own beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who from the others' flank departeth not."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto XX</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When he who all the world illuminates</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of our hemisphere so far descends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That on all sides the daylight is consumed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heaven, that erst by him alone was kindled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth suddenly reveal itself again</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By many lights, wherein is one resplendent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And came into my mind this act of heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the ensign of the world and of its leaders</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had silent in the blessed beak become;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because those living luminaries all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By far more luminous, did songs begin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lapsing and falling from my memory.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O gentle Love, that with a smile dost cloak thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How ardent in those sparks didst thou appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had the breath alone of holy thoughts!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the precious and pellucid crystals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which begemmed the sixth light I beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Silence imposed on the angelic bells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I seemed to hear the murmuring of a river</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That clear descendeth down from rock to rock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Showing the affluence of its mountain-top.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as the sound upon the cithern's neck</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Taketh its form, and as upon the vent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of rustic pipe the wind that enters it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even thus, relieved from the delay of waiting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That murmuring of the eagle mounted up</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along its neck, as if it had been hollow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There it became a voice, and issued thence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From out its beak, in such a form of words</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As the heart waited for wherein I wrote them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"The part in me which sees and bears the sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In mortal eagles," it began to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Now fixedly must needs be looked upon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For of the fires of which I make my figure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those whence the eye doth sparkle in my head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all their orders the supremest are.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who is shining in the midst as pupil</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was once the singer of the Holy Spirit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who bore the ark from city unto city;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now knoweth he the merit of his song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In so far as effect of his own counsel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the reward which is commensurate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of five, that make a circle for my brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He that approacheth nearest to my beak</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did the poor widow for her son console;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now knoweth he how dearly it doth cost</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not following Christ, by the experience</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this sweet life and of its opposite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who comes next in the circumference</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which I speak, upon its highest arc,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did death postpone by penitence sincere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now knoweth he that the eternal judgment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suffers no change, albeit worthy prayer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Maketh below to-morrow of to-day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The next who follows, with the laws and me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the good intent that bore bad fruit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Became a Greek by ceding to the pastor;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now knoweth he how all the ill deduced</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From his good action is not harmful to him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Although the world thereby may be destroyed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he, whom in the downward arc thou seest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Guglielmo was, whom the same land deplores</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That weepeth Charles and Frederick yet alive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now knoweth he how heaven enamoured is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a just king; and in the outward show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his effulgence he reveals it still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who would believe, down in the errant world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That e'er the Trojan Ripheus in this round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could be the fifth one of the holy lights?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now knoweth he enough of what the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has not the power to see of grace divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Although his sight may not discern the bottom."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like as a lark that in the air expatiates,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First singing and then silent with content</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the last sweetness that doth satisfy her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such seemed to me the image of the imprint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the eternal pleasure, by whose will</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth everything become the thing it is.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And notwithstanding to my doubt I was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As glass is to the colour that invests it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wait the time in silence it endured not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But forth from out my mouth, "What things are these?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Extorted with the force of its own weight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat I saw great joy of coruscation.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereafterward with eye still more enkindled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The blessed standard made to me reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To keep me not in wonderment suspended:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"I see that thou believest in these things</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because I say them, but thou seest not how;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that, although believed in, they are hidden.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou doest as he doth who a thing by name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well apprehendeth, but its quiddity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cannot perceive, unless another show it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'Regnum coelorum' suffereth violence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From fervent love, and from that living hope</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That overcometh the Divine volition;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not in the guise that man o'ercometh man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But conquers it because it will be conquered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And conquered conquers by benignity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first life of the eyebrow and the fifth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cause thee astonishment, because with them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou seest the region of the angels painted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They passed not from their bodies, as thou thinkest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gentiles, but Christians in the steadfast faith</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of feet that were to suffer and had suffered.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one from Hell, where no one e'er turns back</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto good will, returned unto his bones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that of living hope was the reward,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of living hope, that placed its efficacy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In prayers to God made to resuscitate him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that 'twere possible to move his will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The glorious soul concerning which I speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Returning to the flesh, where brief its stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Believed in Him who had the power to aid it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in believing, kindled to such fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of genuine love, that at the second death</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Worthy it was to come unto this joy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other one, through grace, that from so deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A fountain wells that never hath the eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of any creature reached its primal wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Set all his love below on righteousness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore from grace to grace did God unclose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His eye to our redemption yet to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence he believed therein, and suffered not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that day forth the stench of paganism,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he reproved therefor the folk perverse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those Maidens three, whom at the right-hand wheel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou didst behold, were unto him for baptism</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More than a thousand years before baptizing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O thou predestination, how remote</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy root is from the aspect of all those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who the First Cause do not behold entire!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And you, O mortals! hold yourselves restrained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In judging; for ourselves, who look on God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We do not know as yet all the elect;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sweet to us is such a deprivation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because our good in this good is made perfect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That whatsoe'er God wills, we also will."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After this manner by that shape divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make clear in me my short-sightedness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was given to me a pleasant medicine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as good singer a good lutanist</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Accompanies with vibrations of the chords,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby more pleasantness the song acquires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, while it spake, do I remember me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I beheld both of those blessed lights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as the winking of the eyes concords,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moving unto the words their little flames.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto XXI</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Already on my Lady's face mine eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Again were fastened, and with these my mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from all other purpose was withdrawn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she smiled not; but "If I were to smile,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She unto me began, "thou wouldst become</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Semele, when she was turned to ashes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because my beauty, that along the stairs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the eternal palace more enkindles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As thou hast seen, the farther we ascend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If it were tempered not, is so resplendent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all thy mortal power in its effulgence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would seem a leaflet that the thunder crushes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We are uplifted to the seventh splendour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That underneath the burning Lion's breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now radiates downward mingled with his power.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fix in direction of thine eyes the mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make of them a mirror for the figure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in this mirror shall appear to thee."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who could know what was the pasturage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My sight had in that blessed countenance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I transferred me to another care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would recognize how grateful was to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Obedience unto my celestial escort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By counterpoising one side with the other.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within the crystal which, around the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Revolving, bears the name of its dear leader,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under whom every wickedness lay dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Coloured like gold, on which the sunshine gleams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A stairway I beheld to such a height</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uplifted, that mine eye pursued it not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Likewise beheld I down the steps descending</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So many splendours, that I thought each light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in the heaven appears was there diffused.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as accordant with their natural custom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rooks together at the break of day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bestir themselves to warm their feathers cold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then some of them fly off without return,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Others come back to where they started from,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And others, wheeling round, still keep at home;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such fashion it appeared to me was there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within the sparkling that together came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As soon as on a certain step it struck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that which nearest unto us remained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Became so clear, that in my thought I said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Well I perceive the love thou showest me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But she, from whom I wait the how and when</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of speech and silence, standeth still; whence I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against desire do well if I ask not."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She thereupon, who saw my silentness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the sight of Him who seeth everything,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said unto me, "Let loose thy warm desire."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I began: "No merit of my own</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Renders me worthy of response from thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for her sake who granteth me the asking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou blessed life that dost remain concealed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In thy beatitude, make known to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cause which draweth thee so near my side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tell me why is silent in this wheel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dulcet symphony of Paradise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through the rest below sounds so devoutly."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Thou hast thy hearing mortal as thy sight,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It answer made to me; "they sing not here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the same cause that Beatrice has not smiled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus far adown the holy stairway's steps</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have I descended but to give thee welcome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With words, and with the light that mantles me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor did more love cause me to be more ready,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For love as much and more up there is burning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As doth the flaming manifest to thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the high charity, that makes us servants</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Prompt to the counsel which controls the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Allotteth here, even as thou dost observe."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"I see full well," said I, "O sacred lamp!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How love unfettered in this court sufficeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To follow the eternal Providence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But this is what seems hard for me to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore predestinate wast thou alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto this office from among thy consorts."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sooner had I come to the last word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than of its middle made the light a centre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whirling itself about like a swift millstone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When answer made the love that was therein:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"On me directed is a light divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Piercing through this in which I am embosomed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which the virtue with my sight conjoined</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lifts me above myself so far, I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The supreme essence from which this is drawn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence comes the joyfulness with which I flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to my sight, as far as it is clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The clearness of the flame I equal make.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that soul in the heaven which is most pure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seraph which his eye on God most fixes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could this demand of thine not satisfy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because so deeply sinks in the abyss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the eternal statute what thou askest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From all created sight it is cut off.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the mortal world, when thou returnest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This carry back, that it may not presume</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Longer tow'rd such a goal to move its feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mind, that shineth here, on earth doth smoke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From this observe how can it do below</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That which it cannot though the heaven assume it?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such limit did its words prescribe to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The question I relinquished, and restricted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Myself to ask it humbly who it was.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Between two shores of Italy rise cliffs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And not far distant from thy native place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So high, the thunders far below them sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And form a ridge that Catria is called,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'Neath which is consecrate a hermitage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wont to be dedicate to worship only."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus unto me the third speech recommenced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then, continuing, it said: "Therein</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto God's service I became so steadfast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That feeding only on the juice of olives</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lightly I passed away the heats and frosts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Contented in my thoughts contemplative.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That cloister used to render to these heavens</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abundantly, and now is empty grown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that perforce it soon must be revealed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I in that place was Peter Damiano;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Peter the Sinner was I in the house</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Our Lady on the Adriatic shore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Little of mortal life remained to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I was called and dragged forth to the hat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which shifteth evermore from bad to worse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came Cephas, and the mighty Vessel came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the Holy Spirit, meagre and barefooted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Taking the food of any hostelry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now some one to support them on each side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The modern shepherds need, and some to lead them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So heavy are they, and to hold their trains.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They cover up their palfreys with their cloaks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that two beasts go underneath one skin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O Patience, that dost tolerate so much!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At this voice saw I many little flames</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From step to step descending and revolving,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every revolution made them fairer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round about this one came they and stood still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a cry uttered of so loud a sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It here could find no parallel, nor I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Distinguished it, the thunder so o'ercame me.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto XXII</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Oppressed with stupor, I unto my guide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turned like a little child who always runs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For refuge there where he confideth most;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she, even as a mother who straightway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gives comfort to her pale and breathless boy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With voice whose wont it is to reassure him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said to me: "Knowest thou not thou art in heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And knowest thou not that heaven is holy all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And what is done here cometh from good zeal?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After what wise the singing would have changed thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I by smiling, thou canst now imagine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since that the cry has startled thee so much,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which if thou hadst understood its prayers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Already would be known to thee the vengeance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which thou shalt look upon before thou diest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sword above here smiteth not in haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor tardily, howe'er it seem to him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who fearing or desiring waits for it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But turn thee round towards the others now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For very illustrious spirits shalt thou see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thou thy sight directest as I say."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As it seemed good to her mine eyes I turned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw a hundred spherules that together</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With mutual rays each other more embellished.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I stood as one who in himself represses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The point of his desire, and ventures not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To question, he so feareth the too much.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now the largest and most luculent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among those pearls came forward, that it might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make my desire concerning it content.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within it then I heard: "If thou couldst see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as myself the charity that burns</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among us, thy conceits would be expressed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, that by waiting thou mayst not come late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the high end, I will make answer even</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the thought of which thou art so chary.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That mountain on whose slope Cassino stands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was frequented of old upon its summit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By a deluded folk and ill-disposed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I am he who first up thither bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The name of Him who brought upon the earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The truth that so much sublimateth us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And such abundant grace upon me shone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the neighbouring towns I drew away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the impious worship that seduced the world.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These other fires, each one of them, were men</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Contemplative, enkindled by that heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which maketh holy flowers and fruits spring up.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here is Macarius, here is Romualdus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here are my brethren, who within the cloisters</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their footsteps stayed and kept a steadfast heart."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I to him: "The affection which thou showest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Speaking with me, and the good countenance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which I behold and note in all your ardours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In me have so my confidence dilated</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As the sun doth the rose, when it becomes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As far unfolded as it hath the power.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore I pray, and thou assure me, father,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If I may so much grace receive, that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May thee behold with countenance unveiled."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He thereupon: "Brother, thy high desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the remotest sphere shall be fulfilled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where are fulfilled all others and my own.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There perfect is, and ripened, and complete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Every desire; within that one alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is every part where it has always been;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For it is not in space, nor turns on poles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto it our stairway reaches up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence thus from out thy sight it steals away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up to that height the Patriarch Jacob saw it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Extending its supernal part, what time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So thronged with angels it appeared to him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to ascend it now no one uplifts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His feet from off the earth, and now my Rule</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Below remaineth for mere waste of paper.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The walls that used of old to be an Abbey</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are changed to dens of robbers, and the cowls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are sacks filled full of miserable flour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But heavy usury is not taken up</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much against God's pleasure as that fruit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which maketh so insane the heart of monks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whatsoever hath the Church in keeping</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is for the folk that ask it in God's name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not for one's kindred or for something worse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flesh of mortals is so very soft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That good beginnings down below suffice not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From springing of the oak to bearing acorns.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peter began with neither gold nor silver,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I with orison and abstinence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Francis with humility his convent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if thou lookest at each one's beginning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then regardest whither he has run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou shalt behold the white changed into brown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In verity the Jordan backward turned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the sea's fleeing, when God willed were more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A wonder to behold, than succour here."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus unto me he said; and then withdrew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To his own band, and the band closed together;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then like a whirlwind all was upward rapt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gentle Lady urged me on behind them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up o'er that stairway by a single sign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did her virtue overcome my nature;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor here below, where one goes up and down</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By natural law, was motion e'er so swift</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it could be compared unto my wing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reader, as I may unto that devout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Triumph return, on whose account I often</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For my transgressions weep and beat my breast,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hadst not thrust thy finger in the fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drawn it out again, before I saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sign that follows Taurus, and was in it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O glorious stars, O light impregnated</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With mighty virtue, from which I acknowledge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All of my genius, whatsoe'er it be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With you was born, and hid himself with you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He who is father of all mortal life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When first I tasted of the Tuscan air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then when grace was freely given to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To enter the high wheel which turns you round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your region was allotted unto me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To you devoutly at this hour my soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is sighing, that it virtue may acquire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the stern pass that draws it to itself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Thou art so near unto the last salvation,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus Beatrice began, "thou oughtest now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have thine eves unclouded and acute;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore, ere thou enter farther in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Look down once more, and see how vast a world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou hast already put beneath thy feet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that thy heart, as jocund as it may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Present itself to the triumphant throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That comes rejoicing through this rounded ether."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I with my sight returned through one and all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sevenfold spheres, and I beheld this globe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such that I smiled at its ignoble semblance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that opinion I approve as best</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which doth account it least; and he who thinks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of something else may truly be called just.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw the daughter of Latona shining</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without that shadow, which to me was cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That once I had believed her rare and dense.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The aspect of thy son, Hyperion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here I sustained, and saw how move themselves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Around and near him Maia and Dione.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thence there appeared the temperateness of Jove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'Twixt son and father, and to me was clear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The change that of their whereabout they make;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the seven made manifest to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How great they are, and eke how swift they are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how they are in distant habitations.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The threshing-floor that maketh us so proud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To me revolving with the eternal Twins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was all apparent made from hill to harbour!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to the beauteous eyes mine eyes I turned.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto XXIII</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Even as a bird, 'mid the beloved leaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quiet upon the nest of her sweet brood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throughout the night, that hideth all things from us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, that she may behold their longed-for looks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And find the food wherewith to nourish them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which, to her, grave labours grateful are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anticipates the time on open spray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with an ardent longing waits the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gazing intent as soon as breaks the dawn:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even thus my Lady standing was, erect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vigilant, turned round towards the zone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Underneath which the sun displays less haste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that beholding her distraught and wistful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such I became as he is who desiring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For something yearns, and hoping is appeased.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But brief the space from one When to the other;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of my awaiting, say I, and the seeing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The welkin grow resplendent more and more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Beatrice exclaimed: "Behold the hosts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Christ's triumphal march, and all the fruit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Harvested by the rolling of these spheres!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seemed to me her face was all aflame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eyes she had so full of ecstasy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I must needs pass on without describing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when in nights serene of the full moon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Smiles Trivia among the nymphs eternal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who paint the firmament through all its gulfs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saw I, above the myriads of lamps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Sun that one and all of them enkindled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">E'en as our own doth the supernal sights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through the living light transparent shone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lucent substance so intensely clear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into my sight, that I sustained it not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Beatrice, thou gentle guide and dear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To me she said: "What overmasters thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A virtue is from which naught shields itself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There are the wisdom and the omnipotence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That oped the thoroughfares 'twixt heaven and earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which there erst had been so long a yearning."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As fire from out a cloud unlocks itself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dilating so it finds not room therein,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And down, against its nature, falls to earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So did my mind, among those aliments</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Becoming larger, issue from itself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that which it became cannot remember.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Open thine eyes, and look at what I am:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou hast beheld such things, that strong enough</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hast thou become to tolerate my smile."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was as one who still retains the feeling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a forgotten vision, and endeavours</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vain to bring it back into his mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I this invitation heard, deserving</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of so much gratitude, it never fades</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the book that chronicles the past.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If at this moment sounded all the tongues</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Polyhymnia and her sisters made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most lubrical with their delicious milk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To aid me, to a thousandth of the truth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It would not reach, singing the holy smile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how the holy aspect it illumed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore, representing Paradise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sacred poem must perforce leap over,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as a man who finds his way cut off;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But whoso thinketh of the ponderous theme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the mortal shoulder laden with it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should blame it not, if under this it tremble.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is no passage for a little boat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This which goes cleaving the audacious prow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor for a pilot who would spare himself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Why doth my face so much enamour thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the garden fair thou turnest not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which under the rays of Christ is blossoming?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is the Rose in which the Word Divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Became incarnate; there the lilies are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By whose perfume the good way was discovered."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus Beatrice; and I, who to her counsels</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was wholly ready, once again betook me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the battle of the feeble brows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in the sunshine, that unsullied streams</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through fractured cloud, ere now a meadow of flowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mine eyes with shadow covered o'er have seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So troops of splendours manifold I saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Illumined from above with burning rays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beholding not the source of the effulgence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O power benignant that dost so imprint them!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou didst exalt thyself to give more scope</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There to mine eyes, that were not strong enough.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The name of that fair flower I e'er invoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Morning and evening utterly enthralled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My soul to gaze upon the greater fire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when in both mine eyes depicted were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The glory and greatness of the living star</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which there excelleth, as it here excelled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Athwart the heavens a little torch descended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Formed in a circle like a coronal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cinctured it, and whirled itself about it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whatever melody most sweetly soundeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On earth, and to itself most draws the soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would seem a cloud that, rent asunder, thunders,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Compared unto the sounding of that lyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith was crowned the sapphire beautiful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which gives the clearest heaven its sapphire hue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"I am Angelic Love, that circle round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The joy sublime which breathes from out the womb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was the hostelry of our Desire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I shall circle, Lady of Heaven, while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou followest thy Son, and mak'st diviner</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sphere supreme, because thou enterest there."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus did the circulated melody</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seal itself up; and all the other lights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were making to resound the name of Mary.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The regal mantle of the volumes all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that world, which most fervid is and living</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With breath of God and with his works and ways,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Extended over us its inner border,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So very distant, that the semblance of it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where I was not yet appeared to me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore mine eyes did not possess the power</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of following the incoronated flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which mounted upward near to its own seed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as a little child, that towards its mother</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stretches its arms, when it the milk has taken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through impulse kindled into outward flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each of those gleams of whiteness upward reached</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So with its summit, that the deep affection</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They had for Mary was revealed to me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereafter they remained there in my sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'Regina coeli' singing with such sweetness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ne'er from me has the delight departed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, what exuberance is garnered up</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within those richest coffers, which had been</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Good husbandmen for sowing here below!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There they enjoy and live upon the treasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was acquired while weeping in the exile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Babylon, wherein the gold was left.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There triumpheth, beneath the exalted Son</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of God and Mary, in his victory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both with the ancient council and the new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who doth keep the keys of such a glory.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto XXIV</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>"O company elect to the great supper</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the Lamb benedight, who feedeth you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that for ever full is your desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If by the grace of God this man foretaste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Something of that which falleth from your table,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ever death prescribe to him the time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Direct your mind to his immense desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him somewhat bedew; ye drinking are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ever at the fount whence comes his thought."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus Beatrice; and those souls beatified</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Transformed themselves to spheres on steadfast poles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flaming intensely in the guise of comets.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as the wheels in works of horologes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Revolve so that the first to the beholder</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Motionless seems, and the last one to fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So in like manner did those carols, dancing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In different measure, of their affluence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Give me the gauge, as they were swift or slow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From that one which I noted of most beauty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld I issue forth a fire so happy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none it left there of a greater brightness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And around Beatrice three several times</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It whirled itself with so divine a song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My fantasy repeats it not to me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore the pen skips, and I write it not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since our imagination for such folds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much more our speech, is of a tint too glaring.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"O holy sister mine, who us implorest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such devotion, by thine ardent love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou dost unbind me from that beautiful sphere!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereafter, having stopped, the blessed fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto my Lady did direct its breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which spake in fashion as I here have said.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she: "O light eterne of the great man</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom our Lord delivered up the keys</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He carried down of this miraculous joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This one examine on points light and grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As good beseemeth thee, about the Faith</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By means of which thou on the sea didst walk.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he love well, and hope well, and believe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From thee 'tis hid not; for thou hast thy sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where depicted everything is seen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But since this kingdom has made citizens</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By means of the true Faith, to glorify it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'Tis well he have the chance to speak thereof."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As baccalaureate arms himself, and speaks not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until the master doth propose the question,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To argue it, and not to terminate it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So did I arm myself with every reason,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While she was speaking, that I might be ready</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For such a questioner and such profession.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Say, thou good Christian; manifest thyself;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What is the Faith?"  Whereat I raised my brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto that light wherefrom was this breathed forth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then turned I round to Beatrice, and she</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Prompt signals made to me that I should pour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The water forth from my internal fountain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"May grace, that suffers me to make confession,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began I, "to the great centurion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cause my conceptions all to be explicit!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I continued: "As the truthful pen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Father, of thy dear brother wrote of it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who put with thee Rome into the good way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faith is the substance of the things we hope for,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evidence of those that are not seen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this appears to me its quiddity."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then heard I: "Very rightly thou perceivest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If well thou understandest why he placed it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With substances and then with evidences."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I thereafterward: "The things profound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That here vouchsafe to me their apparition,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto all eyes below are so concealed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they exist there only in belief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the which is founded the high hope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hence it takes the nature of a substance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it behoveth us from this belief</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To reason without having other sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hence it has the nature of evidence."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then heard I: "If whatever is acquired</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Below by doctrine were thus understood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No sophist's subtlety would there find place."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus was breathed forth from that enkindled love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then added: "Very well has been gone over</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Already of this coin the alloy and weight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But tell me if thou hast it in thy purse?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I: "Yes, both so shining and so round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in its stamp there is no peradventure."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereafter issued from the light profound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That there resplendent was: "This precious jewel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the which is every virtue founded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence hadst thou it?"  And I: "The large outpouring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Holy Spirit, which has been diffused</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the ancient parchments and the new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A syllogism is, which proved it to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such acuteness, that, compared therewith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All demonstration seems to me obtuse."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then I heard: "The ancient and the new</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Postulates, that to thee are so conclusive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why dost thou take them for the word divine?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I: "The proofs, which show the truth to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are the works subsequent, whereunto Nature</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne'er heated iron yet, nor anvil beat."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'Twas answered me: "Say, who assureth thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That those works ever were? the thing itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That must be proved, nought else to thee affirms it."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Were the world to Christianity converted,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I said, "withouten miracles, this one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is such, the rest are not its hundredth part;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because that poor and fasting thou didst enter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the field to sow there the good plant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was a vine and has become a thorn!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This being finished, the high, holy Court</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Resounded through the spheres, "One God we praise!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In melody that there above is chanted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then that Baron, who from branch to branch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Examining, had thus conducted me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till the extremest leaves we were approaching,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again began: "The Grace that dallying</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Plays with thine intellect thy mouth has opened,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up to this point, as it should opened be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that I do approve what forth emerged;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now thou must express what thou believest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whence to thy belief it was presented."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"O holy father, spirit who beholdest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What thou believedst so that thou o'ercamest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towards the sepulchre, more youthful feet,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Began I, "thou dost wish me in this place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The form to manifest of my prompt belief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And likewise thou the cause thereof demandest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I respond: In one God I believe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sole and eterne, who moveth all the heavens</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With love and with desire, himself unmoved;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of such faith not only have I proofs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Physical and metaphysical, but gives them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Likewise the truth that from this place rains down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through Moses, through the Prophets and the Psalms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the Evangel, and through you, who wrote</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After the fiery Spirit sanctified you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Persons three eterne believe, and these</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One essence I believe, so one and trine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They bear conjunction both with 'sunt' and 'est.'</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the profound condition and divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which now I touch upon, doth stamp my mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ofttimes the doctrine evangelical.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This the beginning is, this is the spark</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which afterwards dilates to vivid flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, like a star in heaven, is sparkling in me."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as a lord who hears what pleaseth him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His servant straight embraces, gratulating</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the good news as soon as he is silent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, giving me its benediction, singing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three times encircled me, when I was silent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The apostolic light, at whose command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I spoken had, in speaking I so pleased him.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto XXV</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>If e'er it happen that the Poem Sacred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which both heaven and earth have set their hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that it many a year hath made me lean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O'ercome the cruelty that bars me out</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the fair sheepfold, where a lamb I slumbered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An enemy to the wolves that war upon it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With other voice forthwith, with other fleece</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poet will I return, and at my font</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Baptismal will I take the laurel crown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because into the Faith that maketh known</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All souls to God there entered I, and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Peter for her sake thus my brow encircled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereafterward towards us moved a light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of that band whence issued the first-fruits</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of his vicars Christ behind him left,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then my Lady, full of ecstasy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said unto me: "Look, look! behold the Baron</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For whom below Galicia is frequented."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the same way as, when a dove alights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Near his companion, both of them pour forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Circling about and murmuring, their affection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So one beheld I by the other grand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Prince glorified to be with welcome greeted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lauding the food that there above is eaten.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when their gratulations were complete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Silently 'coram me' each one stood still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So incandescent it o'ercame my sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smiling thereafterwards, said Beatrice:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Illustrious life, by whom the benefactions</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of our Basilica have been described,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make Hope resound within this altitude;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou knowest as oft thou dost personify it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Jesus to the three gave greater clearness."—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Lift up thy head, and make thyself assured;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For what comes hither from the mortal world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must needs be ripened in our radiance."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This comfort came to me from the second fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore mine eyes I lifted to the hills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which bent them down before with too great weight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Since, through his grace, our Emperor wills that thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shouldst find thee face to face, before thy death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the most secret chamber, with his Counts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that, the truth beholden of this court,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hope, which below there rightfully enamours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereby thou strengthen in thyself and others,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say what it is, and how is flowering with it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy mind, and say from whence it came to thee."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus did the second light again continue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Compassionate, who piloted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The plumage of my wings in such high flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did in reply anticipate me thus:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"No child whatever the Church Militant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of greater hope possesses, as is written</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that Sun which irradiates all our band;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore it is conceded him from Egypt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To come into Jerusalem to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ever yet his warfare be completed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The two remaining points, that not for knowledge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have been demanded, but that he report</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How much this virtue unto thee is pleasing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him I leave; for hard he will not find them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor of self-praise; and let him answer them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And may the grace of God in this assist him!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a disciple, who his teacher follows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ready and willing, where he is expert,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his proficiency may be displayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Hope," said I, "is the certain expectation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of future glory, which is the effect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of grace divine and merit precedent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From many stars this light comes unto me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he instilled it first into my heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who was chief singer unto the chief captain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'Sperent in te,' in the high Theody</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He sayeth, 'those who know thy name;' and who</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knoweth it not, if he my faith possess?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou didst instil me, then, with his instilling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the Epistle, so that I am full,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And upon others rain again your rain."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While I was speaking, in the living bosom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that combustion quivered an effulgence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sudden and frequent, in the guise of lightning;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then breathed: "The love wherewith I am inflamed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towards the virtue still which followed me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the palm and issue of the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wills that I breathe to thee that thou delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her; and grateful to me is thy telling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whatever things Hope promises to thee."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I: "The ancient Scriptures and the new</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mark establish, and this shows it me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the souls whom God hath made his friends.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Isaiah saith, that each one garmented</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his own land shall be with twofold garments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his own land is this delightful life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy brother, too, far more explicitly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where he treateth of the robes of white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This revelation manifests to us."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And first, and near the ending of these words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Sperent in te" from over us was heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which responsive answered all the carols.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereafterward a light among them brightened,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that, if Cancer one such crystal had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Winter would have a month of one sole day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as uprises, goes, and enters the dance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A winsome maiden, only to do honour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the new bride, and not from any failing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even thus did I behold the brightened splendour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approach the two, who in a wheel revolved</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As was beseeming to their ardent love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the song and music there it entered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fixed on them my Lady kept her look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as a bride silent and motionless.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"This is the one who lay upon the breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of him our Pelican; and this is he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the great office from the cross elected."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Lady thus; but therefore none the more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did move her sight from its attentive gaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before or afterward these words of hers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as a man who gazes, and endeavours</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see the eclipsing of the sun a little,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And who, by seeing, sightless doth become,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So I became before that latest fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While it was said, "Why dost thou daze thyself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see a thing which here hath no existence?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Earth in the earth my body is, and shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all the others there, until our number</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the eternal proposition tallies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the two garments in the blessed cloister</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are the two lights alone that have ascended:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this shalt thou take back into your world."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at this utterance the flaming circle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grew quiet, with the dulcet intermingling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sound that by the trinal breath was made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to escape from danger or fatigue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The oars that erst were in the water beaten</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are all suspended at a whistle's sound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, how much in my mind was I disturbed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I turned round to look on Beatrice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her I could not see, although I was</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Close at her side and in the Happy World!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto XXVI</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>While I was doubting for my vision quenched,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the flame refulgent that had quenched it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Issued a breathing, that attentive made me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saying: "While thou recoverest the sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of seeing which in me thou hast consumed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'Tis well that speaking thou shouldst compensate it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begin then, and declare to what thy soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is aimed, and count it for a certainty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sight is in thee bewildered and not dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because the Lady, who through this divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Region conducteth thee, has in her look</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The power the hand of Ananias had."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I said: "As pleaseth her, or soon or late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let the cure come to eyes that portals were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When she with fire I ever burn with entered.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Good, that gives contentment to this Court,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Alpha and Omega is of all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The writing that love reads me low or loud."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The selfsame voice, that taken had from me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The terror of the sudden dazzlement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To speak still farther put it in my thought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said: "In verity with finer sieve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behoveth thee to sift; thee it behoveth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To say who aimed thy bow at such a target."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I: "By philosophic arguments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by authority that hence descends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such love must needs imprint itself in me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Good, so far as good, when comprehended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth straight enkindle love, and so much greater</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As more of goodness in itself it holds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to that Essence (whose is such advantage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every good which out of it is found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is nothing but a ray of its own light)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than elsewhither must the mind be moved</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of every one, in loving, who discerns</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The truth in which this evidence is founded.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such truth he to my intellect reveals</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who demonstrates to me the primal love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the sempiternal substances.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The voice reveals it of the truthful Author,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who says to Moses, speaking of Himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'I will make all my goodness pass before thee.'</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou too revealest it to me, beginning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The loud Evangel, that proclaims the secret</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of heaven to earth above all other edict."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I heard say: "By human intellect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by authority concordant with it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all thy loves reserve for God the highest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But say again if other cords thou feelest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Draw thee towards Him, that thou mayst proclaim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With how many teeth this love is biting thee."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The holy purpose of the Eagle of Christ</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not latent was, nay, rather I perceived</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whither he fain would my profession lead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore I recommenced: "All of those bites</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which have the power to turn the heart to God</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto my charity have been concurrent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The being of the world, and my own being,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The death which He endured that I may live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that which all the faithful hope, as I do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the forementioned vivid consciousness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have drawn me from the sea of love perverse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the right have placed me on the shore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The leaves, wherewith embowered is all the garden</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the Eternal Gardener, do I love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As much as he has granted them of good."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as I had ceased, a song most sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throughout the heaven resounded, and my Lady</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said with the others, "Holy, holy, holy!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as at some keen light one wakes from sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By reason of the visual spirit that runs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the splendour passed from coat to coat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he who wakes abhorreth what he sees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So all unconscious is his sudden waking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until the judgment cometh to his aid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So from before mine eyes did Beatrice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chase every mote with radiance of her own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That cast its light a thousand miles and more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence better after than before I saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in a kind of wonderment I asked</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About a fourth light that I saw with us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said my Lady: "There within those rays</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gazes upon its Maker the first soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever the first virtue did create."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as the bough that downward bends its top</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At transit of the wind, and then is lifted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By its own virtue, which inclines it upward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Likewise did I, the while that she was speaking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being amazed, and then I was made bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By a desire to speak wherewith I burned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I began: "O apple, that mature</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alone hast been produced, O ancient father,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom each wife is daughter and daughter-in-law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Devoutly as I can I supplicate thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thou wouldst speak to me; thou seest my wish;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I, to hear thee quickly, speak it not."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes an animal, when covered, struggles</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that his impulse needs must be apparent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By reason of the wrappage following it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in like manner the primeval soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made clear to me athwart its covering</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How jubilant it was to give me pleasure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then breathed: "Without thy uttering it to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thine inclination better I discern</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than thou whatever thing is surest to thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I behold it in the truthful mirror,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of Himself all things parhelion makes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And none makes Him parhelion of itself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou fain wouldst hear how long ago God placed me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within the lofty garden, where this Lady</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto so long a stairway thee disposed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how long to mine eyes it was a pleasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the great disdain the proper cause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the language that I used and that I made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, son of mine, the tasting of the tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not in itself was cause of so great exile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But solely the o'erstepping of the bounds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, whence thy Lady moved Virgilius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Four thousand and three hundred and two circuits</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made by the sun, this Council I desired;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him I saw return to all the lights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his highway nine hundred times and thirty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilst I upon the earth was tarrying.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The language that I spake was quite extinct</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before that in the work interminable</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The people under Nimrod were employed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For nevermore result of reasoning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Because of human pleasure that doth change,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Obedient to the heavens) was durable.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A natural action is it that man speaks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But whether thus or thus, doth nature leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To your own art, as seemeth best to you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere I descended to the infernal anguish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'El' was on earth the name of the Chief Good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whom comes all the joy that wraps me round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'Eli' he then was called, and that is proper,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because the use of men is like a leaf</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On bough, which goeth and another cometh.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the mount that highest o'er the wave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rises was I, in life or pure or sinful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the first hour to that which is the second,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the sun changes quadrant, to the sixth."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto XXVII</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>"Glory be to the Father, to the Son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Holy Ghost!" all Paradise began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the melody inebriate made me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What I beheld seemed unto me a smile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the universe; for my inebriation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Found entrance through the hearing and the sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O joy!  O gladness inexpressible!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O perfect life of love and peacefulness!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O riches without hankering secure!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before mine eyes were standing the four torches</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enkindled, and the one that first had come</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began to make itself more luminous;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even such in semblance it became</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Jupiter would become, if he and Mars</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were birds, and they should interchange their feathers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Providence, which here distributeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Season and service, in the blessed choir</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had silence upon every side imposed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I heard say: "If I my colour change,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Marvel not at it; for while I am speaking</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou shalt behold all these their colour change.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who usurps upon the earth my place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My place, my place, which vacant has become</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before the presence of the Son of God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has of my cemetery made a sewer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of blood and stench, whereby the Perverse One,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who fell from here, below there is appeased!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the same colour which, through sun adverse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Painteth the clouds at evening or at morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld I then the whole of heaven suffused.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as a modest woman, who abides</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sure of herself, and at another's failing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From listening only, timorous becomes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even thus did Beatrice change countenance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I believe in heaven was such eclipse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When suffered the supreme Omnipotence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereafterward proceeded forth his words</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With voice so much transmuted from itself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The very countenance was not more changed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"The spouse of Christ has never nurtured been</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On blood of mine, of Linus and of Cletus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be made use of in acquest of gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in acquest of this delightful life</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sixtus and Pius, Urban and Calixtus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After much lamentation, shed their blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our purpose was not, that on the right hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of our successors should in part be seated</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Christian folk, in part upon the other;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor that the keys which were to me confided</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should e'er become the escutcheon on a banner,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That should wage war on those who are baptized;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor I be made the figure of a seal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To privileges venal and mendacious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat I often redden and flash with fire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In garb of shepherds the rapacious wolves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are seen from here above o'er all the pastures!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O wrath of God, why dost thou slumber still?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To drink our blood the Caorsines and Gascons</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are making ready.  O thou good beginning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto how vile an end must thou needs fall!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the high Providence, that with Scipio</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At Rome the glory of the world defended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will speedily bring aid, as I conceive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou, my son, who by thy mortal weight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shalt down return again, open thy mouth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What I conceal not, do not thou conceal."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As with its frozen vapours downward falls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In flakes our atmosphere, what time the horn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the celestial Goat doth touch the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upward in such array saw I the ether</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Become, and flaked with the triumphant vapours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which there together with us had remained.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sight was following up their semblances,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And followed till the medium, by excess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The passing farther onward took from it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat the Lady, who beheld me freed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From gazing upward, said to me: "Cast down</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy sight, and see how far thou art turned round."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since the first time that I had downward looked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw that I had moved through the whole arc</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which the first climate makes from midst to end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that I saw the mad track of Ulysses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Past Gades, and this side, well nigh the shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereon became Europa a sweet burden.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of this threshing-floor the site to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were more unveiled, but the sun was proceeding</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under my feet, a sign and more removed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My mind enamoured, which is dallying</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At all times with my Lady, to bring back</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her mine eyes was more than ever ardent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if or Art or Nature has made bait</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To catch the eyes and so possess the mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In human flesh or in its portraiture,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All joined together would appear as nought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the divine delight which shone upon me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When to her smiling face I turned me round.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The virtue that her look endowed me with</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the fair nest of Leda tore me forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And up into the swiftest heaven impelled me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its parts exceeding full of life and lofty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are all so uniform, I cannot say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Beatrice selected for my place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But she, who was aware of my desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began, the while she smiled so joyously</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That God seemed in her countenance to rejoice:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"The nature of that motion, which keeps quiet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The centre and all the rest about it moves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From hence begins as from its starting point.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in this heaven there is no other Where</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than in the Mind Divine, wherein is kindled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The love that turns it, and the power it rains.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within a circle light and love embrace it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as this doth the others, and that precinct</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He who encircles it alone controls.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its motion is not by another meted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all the others measured are by this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ten is by the half and by the fifth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in what manner time in such a pot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May have its roots, and in the rest its leaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now unto thee can manifest be made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Covetousness, that mortals dost ingulf</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath thee so, that no one hath the power</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of drawing back his eyes from out thy waves!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full fairly blossoms in mankind the will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the uninterrupted rain converts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into abortive wildings the true plums.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fidelity and innocence are found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Only in children; afterwards they both</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Take flight or e'er the cheeks with down are covered.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One, while he prattles still, observes the fasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, when his tongue is loosed, forthwith devours</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whatever food under whatever moon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another, while he prattles, loves and listens</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his mother, who when speech is perfect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthwith desires to see her in her grave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even thus is swarthy made the skin so white</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In its first aspect of the daughter fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of him who brings the morn, and leaves the night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou, that it may not be a marvel to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Think that on earth there is no one who governs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence goes astray the human family.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere January be unwintered wholly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the centesimal on earth neglected,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall these supernal circles roar so loud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tempest that has been so long awaited</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall whirl the poops about where are the prows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the fleet shall run its course direct,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the true fruit shall follow on the flower."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto XXVIII</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>After the truth against the present life</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of miserable mortals was unfolded</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By her who doth imparadise my mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in a looking-glass a taper's flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He sees who from behind is lighted by it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before he has it in his sight or thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And turns him round to see if so the glass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell him the truth, and sees that it accords</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith as doth a music with its metre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In similar wise my memory recollecteth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I did, looking into those fair eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which Love made the springes to ensnare me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as I turned me round, and mine were touched</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By that which is apparent in that volume,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whenever on its gyre we gaze intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A point beheld I, that was raying out</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Light so acute, the sight which it enkindles</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must close perforce before such great acuteness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whatsoever star seems smallest here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would seem to be a moon, if placed beside it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one star with another star is placed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps at such a distance as appears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A halo cincturing the light that paints it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When densest is the vapour that sustains it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus distant round the point a circle of fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So swiftly whirled, that it would have surpassed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whatever motion soonest girds the world;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this was by another circumcinct,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That by a third, the third then by a fourth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By a fifth the fourth, and then by a sixth the fifth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The seventh followed thereupon in width</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So ample now, that Juno's messenger</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Entire would be too narrow to contain it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even so the eighth and ninth; and every one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More slowly moved, according as it was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In number distant farther from the first.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that one had its flame most crystalline</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From which less distant was the stainless spark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I think because more with its truth imbued.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Lady, who in my anxiety</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld me much perplexed, said: "From that point</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dependent is the heaven and nature all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold that circle most conjoined to it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And know thou, that its motion is so swift</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through burning love whereby it is spurred on."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I to her: "If the world were arranged</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the order which I see in yonder wheels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What's set before me would have satisfied me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in the world of sense we can perceive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That evermore the circles are diviner</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As they are from the centre more remote</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore if my desire is to be ended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In this miraculous and angelic temple,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That has for confines only love and light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hear behoves me still how the example</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the exemplar go not in one fashion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since for myself in vain I contemplate it."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"If thine own fingers unto such a knot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be insufficient, it is no great wonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So hard hath it become for want of trying."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Lady thus; then said she: "Do thou take</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What I shall tell thee, if thou wouldst be sated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And exercise on that thy subtlety.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The circles corporal are wide and narrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">According to the more or less of virtue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is distributed through all their parts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The greater goodness works the greater weal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The greater weal the greater body holds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If perfect equally are all its parts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore this one which sweeps along with it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The universe sublime, doth correspond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the circle which most loves and knows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On which account, if thou unto the virtue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Apply thy measure, not to the appearance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of substances that unto thee seem round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wilt behold a marvellous agreement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of more to greater, and of less to smaller,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In every heaven, with its Intelligence."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as remaineth splendid and serene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hemisphere of air, when Boreas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is blowing from that cheek where he is mildest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because is purified and resolved the rack</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That erst disturbed it, till the welkin laughs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all the beauties of its pageantry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus did I likewise, after that my Lady</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had me provided with her clear response,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a star in heaven the truth was seen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soon as to a stop her words had come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not otherwise does iron scintillate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When molten, than those circles scintillated.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their coruscation all the sparks repeated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they so many were, their number makes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More millions than the doubling of the chess.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I heard them sing hosanna choir by choir</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the fixed point which holds them at the 'Ubi,'</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever will, where they have ever been.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she, who saw the dubious meditations</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within my mind, "The primal circles," said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Have shown thee Seraphim and Cherubim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus rapidly they follow their own bonds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be as like the point as most they can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And can as far as they are high in vision.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those other Loves, that round about them go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrones of the countenance divine are called,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because they terminate the primal Triad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou shouldst know that they all have delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As much as their own vision penetrates</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Truth, in which all intellect finds rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From this it may be seen how blessedness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is founded in the faculty which sees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And not in that which loves, and follows next;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of this seeing merit is the measure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is brought forth by grace, and by good will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus on from grade to grade doth it proceed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The second Triad, which is germinating</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In such wise in this sempiternal spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That no nocturnal Aries despoils,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perpetually hosanna warbles forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With threefold melody, that sounds in three</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Orders of joy, with which it is intrined.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The three Divine are in this hierarchy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First the Dominions, and the Virtues next;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the third order is that of the Powers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then in the dances twain penultimate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Principalities and Archangels wheel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The last is wholly of angelic sports.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These orders upward all of them are gazing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And downward so prevail, that unto God</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They all attracted are and all attract.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Dionysius with so great desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To contemplate these Orders set himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He named them and distinguished them as I do.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Gregory afterwards dissented from him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore, as soon as he unclosed his eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within this heaven, he at himself did smile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if so much of secret truth a mortal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proffered on earth, I would not have thee marvel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he who saw it here revealed it to him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With much more of the truth about these circles."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto XXIX</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>At what time both the children of Latona,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Surmounted by the Ram and by the Scales,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Together make a zone of the horizon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As long as from the time the zenith holds them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In equipoise, till from that girdle both</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Changing their hemisphere disturb the balance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So long, her face depicted with a smile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did Beatrice keep silence while she gazed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fixedly at the point which had o'ercome me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then she began: "I say, and I ask not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What thou dost wish to hear, for I have seen it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where centres every When and every 'Ubi.'</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to acquire some good unto himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is impossible, but that his splendour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In its resplendency may say, 'Subsisto,'</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his eternity outside of time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Outside all other limits, as it pleased him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into new Loves the Eternal Love unfolded.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor as if torpid did he lie before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For neither after nor before proceeded</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The going forth of God upon these waters.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Matter and Form unmingled and conjoined</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came into being that had no defect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">E'en as three arrows from a three-stringed bow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as in glass, in amber, or in crystal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sunbeam flashes so, that from its coming</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To its full being is no interval,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So from its Lord did the triform effect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ray forth into its being all together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without discrimination of beginning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Order was con-created and constructed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In substances, and summit of the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were those wherein the pure act was produced.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pure potentiality held the lowest part;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Midway bound potentiality with act</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such bond that it shall never be unbound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jerome has written unto you of angels</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Created a long lapse of centuries</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ever yet the other world was made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But written is this truth in many places</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By writers of the Holy Ghost, and thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shalt see it, if thou lookest well thereat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even reason seeth it somewhat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For it would not concede that for so long</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could be the motors without their perfection.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now dost thou know both where and when these Loves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Created were, and how; so that extinct</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In thy desire already are three fires.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor could one reach, in counting, unto twenty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So swiftly, as a portion of these angels</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disturbed the subject of your elements.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rest remained, and they began this art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which thou discernest, with so great delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never from their circling do they cease.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The occasion of the fall was the accursed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Presumption of that One, whom thou hast seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By all the burden of the world constrained.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those whom thou here beholdest modest were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To recognise themselves as of that goodness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which made them apt for so much understanding;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On which account their vision was exalted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the enlightening grace and their own merit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that they have a full and steadfast will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would not have thee doubt, but certain be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'Tis meritorious to receive this grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">According as the affection opens to it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now round about in this consistory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much mayst thou contemplate, if these my words</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be gathered up, without all further aid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But since upon the earth, throughout your schools,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They teach that such is the angelic nature</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it doth hear, and recollect, and will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More will I say, that thou mayst see unmixed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The truth that is confounded there below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Equivocating in such like prelections.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These substances, since in God's countenance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They jocund were, turned not away their sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that wherefrom not anything is hidden;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence they have not their vision intercepted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By object new, and hence they do not need</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To recollect, through interrupted thought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that below, not sleeping, people dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Believing they speak truth, and not believing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the last is greater sin and shame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Below you do not journey by one path</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Philosophising; so transporteth you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love of appearance and the thought thereof.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even this above here is endured</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With less disdain, than when is set aside</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Holy Writ, or when it is distorted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They think not there how much of blood it costs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sow it in the world, and how he pleases</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who in humility keeps close to it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each striveth for appearance, and doth make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His own inventions; and these treated are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By preachers, and the Evangel holds its peace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One sayeth that the moon did backward turn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the Passion of Christ, and interpose herself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the sunlight reached not down below;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lies; for of its own accord the light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hid itself; whence to Spaniards and to Indians,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As to the Jews, did such eclipse respond.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Florence has not so many Lapi and Bindi</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As fables such as these, that every year</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are shouted from the pulpit back and forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In such wise that the lambs, who do not know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come back from pasture fed upon the wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And not to see the harm doth not excuse them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Christ did not to his first disciples say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'Go forth, and to the world preach idle tales,'</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But unto them a true foundation gave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this so loudly sounded from their lips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, in the warfare to enkindle Faith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They made of the Evangel shields and lances.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now men go forth with jests and drolleries</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To preach, and if but well the people laugh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hood puffs out, and nothing more is asked.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in the cowl there nestles such a bird,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, if the common people were to see it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They would perceive what pardons they confide in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which so great on earth has grown the folly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, without proof of any testimony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To each indulgence they would flock together.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By this Saint Anthony his pig doth fatten,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many others, who are worse than pigs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Paying in money without mark of coinage.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But since we have digressed abundantly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turn back thine eyes forthwith to the right path,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the way be shortened with the time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This nature doth so multiply itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In numbers, that there never yet was speech</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor mortal fancy that can go so far.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if thou notest that which is revealed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Daniel, thou wilt see that in his thousands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Number determinate is kept concealed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The primal light, that all irradiates it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By modes as many is received therein,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As are the splendours wherewith it is mated.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence, inasmuch as on the act conceptive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The affection followeth, of love the sweetness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein diversely fervid is or tepid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The height behold now and the amplitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the eternal power, since it hath made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Itself so many mirrors, where 'tis broken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One in itself remaining as before."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto XXX</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Perchance six thousand miles remote from us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is glowing the sixth hour, and now this world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Inclines its shadow almost to a level,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the mid-heaven begins to make itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So deep to us, that here and there a star</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ceases to shine so far down as this depth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as advances bright exceedingly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The handmaid of the sun, the heaven is closed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Light after light to the most beautiful;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not otherwise the Triumph, which for ever</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Plays round about the point that vanquished me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeming enclosed by what itself encloses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Little by little from my vision faded;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat to turn mine eyes on Beatrice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My seeing nothing and my love constrained me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If what has hitherto been said of her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were all concluded in a single praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scant would it be to serve the present turn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not only does the beauty I beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Transcend ourselves, but truly I believe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its Maker only may enjoy it all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vanquished do I confess me by this passage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More than by problem of his theme was ever</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O'ercome the comic or the tragic poet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as the sun the sight that trembles most,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even so the memory of that sweet smile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My mind depriveth of its very self.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the first day that I beheld her face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In this life, to the moment of this look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sequence of my song has ne'er been severed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now perforce this sequence must desist</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From following her beauty with my verse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As every artist at his uttermost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as I leave her to a greater fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than any of my trumpet, which is bringing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its arduous matter to a final close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With voice and gesture of a perfect leader</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She recommenced: "We from the greatest body</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have issued to the heaven that is pure light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Light intellectual replete with love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love of true good replete with ecstasy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ecstasy that transcendeth every sweetness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here shalt thou see the one host and the other</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Paradise, and one in the same aspects</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which at the final judgment thou shalt see."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as a sudden lightning that disperses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The visual spirits, so that it deprives</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The eye of impress from the strongest objects,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus round about me flashed a living light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left me swathed around with such a veil</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of its effulgence, that I nothing saw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Ever the Love which quieteth this heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Welcomes into itself with such salute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make the candle ready for its flame."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sooner had within me these brief words</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An entrance found, than I perceived myself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be uplifted over my own power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I with vision new rekindled me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such that no light whatever is so pure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that mine eyes were fortified against it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And light I saw in fashion of a river</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fulvid with its effulgence, 'twixt two banks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Depicted with an admirable Spring.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of this river issued living sparks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on all sides sank down into the flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like unto rubies that are set in gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then, as if inebriate with the odours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They plunged again into the wondrous torrent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as one entered issued forth another.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"The high desire, that now inflames and moves thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have intelligence of what thou seest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pleaseth me all the more, the more it swells.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of this water it behoves thee drink</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before so great a thirst in thee be slaked."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus said to me the sunshine of mine eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And added: "The river and the topazes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Going in and out, and the laughing of the herbage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are of their truth foreshadowing prefaces;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not that these things are difficult in themselves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the deficiency is on thy side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For yet thou hast not vision so exalted."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no babe that leaps so suddenly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With face towards the milk, if he awake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much later than his usual custom is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I did, that I might make better mirrors</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still of mine eyes, down stooping to the wave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which flows that we therein be better made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even as the penthouse of mine eyelids</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drank of it, it forthwith appeared to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of its length to be transformed to round.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then as a folk who have been under masks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seem other than before, if they divest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The semblance not their own they disappeared in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus into greater pomp were changed for me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flowerets and the sparks, so that I saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both of the Courts of Heaven made manifest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O splendour of God! by means of which I saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lofty triumph of the realm veracious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Give me the power to say how it I saw!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is a light above, which visible</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Makes the Creator unto every creature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who only in beholding Him has peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it expands itself in circular form</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To such extent, that its circumference</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would be too large a girdle for the sun.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The semblance of it is all made of rays</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reflected from the top of Primal Motion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which takes therefrom vitality and power.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as a hill in water at its base</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mirrors itself, as if to see its beauty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When affluent most in verdure and in flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, ranged aloft all round about the light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mirrored I saw in more ranks than a thousand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All who above there have from us returned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if the lowest row collect within it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So great a light, how vast the amplitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is of this Rose in its extremest leaves!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My vision in the vastness and the height</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lost not itself, but comprehended all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The quantity and quality of that gladness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There near and far nor add nor take away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For there where God immediately doth govern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The natural law in naught is relevant.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the yellow of the Rose Eternal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That spreads, and multiplies, and breathes an odour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of praise unto the ever-vernal Sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As one who silent is and fain would speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me Beatrice drew on, and said: "Behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the white stoles how vast the convent is!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold how vast the circuit of our city!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behold our seats so filled to overflowing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That here henceforward are few people wanting!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On that great throne whereon thine eyes are fixed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the crown's sake already placed upon it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before thou suppest at this wedding feast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall sit the soul (that is to be Augustus</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On earth) of noble Henry, who shall come</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To redress Italy ere she be ready.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blind covetousness, that casts its spell upon you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has made you like unto the little child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who dies of hunger and drives off the nurse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the sacred forum then shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Prefect such, that openly or covert</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the same road he will not walk with him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But long of God he will not be endured</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In holy office; he shall be thrust down</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Simon Magus is for his deserts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make him of Alagna lower go!"</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto XXXI</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>In fashion then as of a snow-white rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Displayed itself to me the saintly host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom Christ in his own blood had made his bride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the other host, that flying sees and sings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The glory of Him who doth enamour it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the goodness that created it so noble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as a swarm of bees, that sinks in flowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One moment, and the next returns again</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To where its labour is to sweetness turned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sank into the great flower, that is adorned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With leaves so many, and thence reascended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To where its love abideth evermore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their faces had they all of living flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wings of gold, and all the rest so white</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No snow unto that limit doth attain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From bench to bench, into the flower descending,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They carried something of the peace and ardour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which by the fanning of their flanks they won.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor did the interposing 'twixt the flower</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And what was o'er it of such plenitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of flying shapes impede the sight and splendour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because the light divine so penetrates</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The universe, according to its merit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That naught can be an obstacle against it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This realm secure and full of gladsomeness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crowded with ancient people and with modern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto one mark had all its look and love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Trinal Light, that in a single star</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sparkling upon their sight so satisfies them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Look down upon our tempest here below!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If the barbarians, coming from some region</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every day by Helice is covered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Revolving with her son whom she delights in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beholding Rome and all her noble works,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were wonder-struck, what time the Lateran</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above all mortal things was eminent,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I who to the divine had from the human,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From time unto eternity, had come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Florence to a people just and sane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With what amazement must I have been filled!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Truly between this and the joy, it was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My pleasure not to hear, and to be mute.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as a pilgrim who delighteth him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In gazing round the temple of his vow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hopes some day to retell how it was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So through the living light my way pursuing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Directed I mine eyes o'er all the ranks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now up, now down, and now all round about.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faces I saw of charity persuasive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Embellished by His light and their own smile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And attitudes adorned with every grace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The general form of Paradise already</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My glance had comprehended as a whole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In no part hitherto remaining fixed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And round I turned me with rekindled wish</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Lady to interrogate of things</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Concerning which my mind was in suspense.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One thing I meant, another answered me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I thought I should see Beatrice, and saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An Old Man habited like the glorious people.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O'erflowing was he in his eyes and cheeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With joy benign, in attitude of pity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As to a tender father is becoming.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And "She, where is she?" instantly I said;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence he: "To put an end to thy desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me Beatrice hath sent from mine own place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if thou lookest up to the third round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the first rank, again shalt thou behold her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the throne her merits have assigned her."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without reply I lifted up mine eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw her, as she made herself a crown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reflecting from herself the eternal rays.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not from that region which the highest thunders</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is any mortal eye so far removed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whatsoever sea it deepest sinks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As there from Beatrice my sight; but this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was nothing unto me; because her image</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Descended not to me by medium blurred.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"O Lady, thou in whom my hope is strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And who for my salvation didst endure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Hell to leave the imprint of thy feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of whatsoever things I have beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As coming from thy power and from thy goodness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I recognise the virtue and the grace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou from a slave hast brought me unto freedom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By all those ways, by all the expedients,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby thou hadst the power of doing it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Preserve towards me thy magnificence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that this soul of mine, which thou hast healed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pleasing to thee be loosened from the body."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus I implored; and she, so far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Smiled, as it seemed, and looked once more at me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then unto the eternal fountain turned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said the Old Man holy: "That thou mayst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Accomplish perfectly thy journeying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereunto prayer and holy love have sent me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fly with thine eyes all round about this garden;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For seeing it will discipline thy sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Farther to mount along the ray divine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she, the Queen of Heaven, for whom I burn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wholly with love, will grant us every grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because that I her faithful Bernard am."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he who peradventure from Croatia</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cometh to gaze at our Veronica,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who through its ancient fame is never sated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But says in thought, the while it is displayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"My Lord, Christ Jesus, God of very God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now was your semblance made like unto this?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even such was I while gazing at the living</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Charity of the man, who in this world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By contemplation tasted of that peace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Thou son of grace, this jocund life," began he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Will not be known to thee by keeping ever</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thine eyes below here on the lowest place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But mark the circles to the most remote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until thou shalt behold enthroned the Queen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom this realm is subject and devoted."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I lifted up mine eyes, and as at morn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The oriental part of the horizon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Surpasses that wherein the sun goes down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus, as if going with mine eyes from vale</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To mount, I saw a part in the remoteness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Surpass in splendour all the other front.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even as there where we await the pole</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Phaeton drove badly, blazes more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The light, and is on either side diminished,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So likewise that pacific oriflamme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gleamed brightest in the centre, and each side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In equal measure did the flame abate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at that centre, with their wings expanded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More than a thousand jubilant Angels saw I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each differing in effulgence and in kind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw there at their sports and at their songs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A beauty smiling, which the gladness was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within the eyes of all the other saints;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if I had in speaking as much wealth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in imagining, I should not dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To attempt the smallest part of its delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bernard, as soon as he beheld mine eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fixed and intent upon its fervid fervour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His own with such affection turned to her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it made mine more ardent to behold.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto XXXII</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Absorbed in his delight, that contemplator</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Assumed the willing office of a teacher,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gave beginning to these holy words:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"The wound that Mary closed up and anointed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She at her feet who is so beautiful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She is the one who opened it and pierced it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within that order which the third seats make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is seated Rachel, lower than the other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Beatrice, in manner as thou seest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sarah, Rebecca, Judith, and her who was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ancestress of the Singer, who for dole</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the misdeed said, 'Miserere mei,'</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Canst thou behold from seat to seat descending</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down in gradation, as with each one's name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I through the Rose go down from leaf to leaf.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And downward from the seventh row, even as</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the same, succeed the Hebrew women,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dividing all the tresses of the flower;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because, according to the view which Faith</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Christ had taken, these are the partition</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which the sacred stairways are divided.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon this side, where perfect is the flower</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With each one of its petals, seated are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those who believed in Christ who was to come.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the other side, where intersected</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With vacant spaces are the semicircles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are those who looked to Christ already come.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as, upon this side, the glorious seat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the Lady of Heaven, and the other seats</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Below it, such a great division make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So opposite doth that of the great John,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, ever holy, desert and martyrdom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Endured, and afterwards two years in Hell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And under him thus to divide were chosen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Francis, and Benedict, and Augustine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And down to us the rest from round to round.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold now the high providence divine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For one and other aspect of the Faith</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In equal measure shall this garden fill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And know that downward from that rank which cleaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Midway the sequence of the two divisions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not by their proper merit are they seated;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But by another's under fixed conditions;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For these are spirits one and all assoiled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before they any true election had.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well canst thou recognise it in their faces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And also in their voices puerile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thou regard them well and hearken to them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now doubtest thou, and doubting thou art silent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I will loosen for thee the strong bond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which thy subtile fancies hold thee fast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within the amplitude of this domain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No casual point can possibly find place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No more than sadness can, or thirst, or hunger;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For by eternal law has been established</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whatever thou beholdest, so that closely</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ring is fitted to the finger here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore are these people, festinate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto true life, not 'sine causa' here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More and less excellent among themselves.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The King, by means of whom this realm reposes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In so great love and in so great delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That no will ventureth to ask for more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his own joyous aspect every mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Creating, at his pleasure dowers with grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Diversely; and let here the effect suffice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this is clearly and expressly noted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For you in Holy Scripture, in those twins</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who in their mother had their anger roused.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>According to the colour of the hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, with such a grace the light supreme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Consenteth that they worthily be crowned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without, then, any merit of their deeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stationed are they in different gradations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Differing only in their first acuteness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'Tis true that in the early centuries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With innocence, to work out their salvation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sufficient was the faith of parents only.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the earlier ages were completed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behoved it that the males by circumcision</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto their innocent wings should virtue add;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But after that the time of grace had come</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without the baptism absolute of Christ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such innocence below there was retained.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look now into the face that unto Christ</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath most resemblance; for its brightness only</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is able to prepare thee to see Christ."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On her did I behold so great a gladness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rain down, borne onward in the holy minds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Created through that altitude to fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That whatsoever I had seen before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did not suspend me in such admiration,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor show me such similitude of God.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the same Love that first descended there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ave Maria, gratia plena," singing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In front of her his wings expanded wide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the canticle divine responded</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From every part the court beatified,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that each sight became serener for it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"O holy father, who for me endurest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be below here, leaving the sweet place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which thou sittest by eternal lot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who is the Angel that with so much joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the eyes is looking of our Queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enamoured so that he seems made of fire?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus I again recourse had to the teaching</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that one who delighted him in Mary</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As doth the star of morning in the sun.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: "Such gallantry and grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As there can be in Angel and in soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All is in him; and thus we fain would have it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because he is the one who bore the palm</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down unto Mary, when the Son of God</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To take our burden on himself decreed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now come onward with thine eyes, as I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Speaking shall go, and note the great patricians</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this most just and merciful of empires.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those two that sit above there most enrapture</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As being very near unto Augusta,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are as it were the two roots of this Rose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who upon the left is near her placed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The father is, by whose audacious taste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The human species so much bitter tastes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the right thou seest that ancient father</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Holy Church, into whose keeping Christ</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The keys committed of this lovely flower.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he who all the evil days beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before his death, of her the beauteous bride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with the spear and with the nails was won,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside him sits, and by the other rests</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That leader under whom on manna lived</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The people ingrate, fickle, and stiff-necked.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Opposite Peter seest thou Anna seated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So well content to look upon her daughter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her eyes she moves not while she sings Hosanna.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And opposite the eldest household father</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lucia sits, she who thy Lady moved</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When to rush downward thou didst bend thy brows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But since the moments of thy vision fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here will we make full stop, as a good tailor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who makes the gown according to his cloth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unto the first Love will turn our eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That looking upon Him thou penetrate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As far as possible through his effulgence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Truly, lest peradventure thou recede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Moving thy wings believing to advance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By prayer behoves it that grace be obtained;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grace from that one who has the power to aid thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thou shalt follow me with thy affection</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from my words thy heart turn not aside."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he began this holy orison.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto XXXIII</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>"Thou Virgin Mother, daughter of thy Son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Humble and high beyond all other creature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The limit fixed of the eternal counsel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art the one who such nobility</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To human nature gave, that its Creator</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did not disdain to make himself its creature.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within thy womb rekindled was the love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By heat of which in the eternal peace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After such wise this flower has germinated.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here unto us thou art a noonday torch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of charity, and below there among mortals</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou art the living fountain-head of hope.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lady, thou art so great, and so prevailing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he who wishes grace, nor runs to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His aspirations without wings would fly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not only thy benignity gives succour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him who asketh it, but oftentimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forerunneth of its own accord the asking.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thee compassion is, in thee is pity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In thee magnificence; in thee unites</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whate'er of goodness is in any creature.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now doth this man, who from the lowest depth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the universe as far as here has seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One after one the spiritual lives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Supplicate thee through grace for so much power</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with his eyes he may uplift himself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Higher towards the uttermost salvation.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, who never burned for my own seeing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More than I do for his, all of my prayers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proffer to thee, and pray they come not short,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou wouldst scatter from him every cloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his mortality so with thy prayers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the Chief Pleasure be to him displayed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still farther do I pray thee, Queen, who canst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whate'er thou wilt, that sound thou mayst preserve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After so great a vision his affections.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let thy protection conquer human movements;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">See Beatrice and all the blessed ones</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My prayers to second clasp their hands to thee!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The eyes beloved and revered of God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fastened upon the speaker, showed to us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How grateful unto her are prayers devout;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then unto the Eternal Light they turned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which it is not credible could be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By any creature bent an eye so clear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, who to the end of all desires</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was now approaching, even as I ought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ardour of desire within me ended.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bernard was beckoning unto me, and smiling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I should upward look; but I already</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was of my own accord such as he wished;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because my sight, becoming purified,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was entering more and more into the ray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the High Light which of itself is true.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From that time forward what I saw was greater</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than our discourse, that to such vision yields,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yields the memory unto such excess.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as he is who seeth in a dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after dreaming the imprinted passion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remains, and to his mind the rest returns not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even such am I, for almost utterly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ceases my vision, and distilleth yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within my heart the sweetness born of it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even thus the snow is in the sun unsealed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even thus upon the wind in the light leaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were the soothsayings of the Sibyl lost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Light Supreme, that dost so far uplift thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the conceits of mortals, to my mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of what thou didst appear re-lend a little,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make my tongue of so great puissance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That but a single sparkle of thy glory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It may bequeath unto the future people;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For by returning to my memory somewhat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by a little sounding in these verses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More of thy victory shall be conceived!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I think the keenness of the living ray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which I endured would have bewildered me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If but mine eyes had been averted from it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I remember that I was more bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On this account to bear, so that I joined</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My aspect with the Glory Infinite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O grace abundant, by which I presumed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fix my sight upon the Light Eternal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the seeing I consumed therein!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw that in its depth far down is lying</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bound up with love together in one volume,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What through the universe in leaves is scattered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Substance, and accident, and their operations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All interfused together in such wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That what I speak of is one simple light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The universal fashion of this knot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Methinks I saw, since more abundantly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In saying this I feel that I rejoice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One moment is more lethargy to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than five and twenty centuries to the emprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That startled Neptune with the shade of Argo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My mind in this wise wholly in suspense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Steadfast, immovable, attentive gazed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore with gazing grew enkindled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In presence of that light one such becomes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to withdraw therefrom for other prospect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is impossible he e'er consent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because the good, which object is of will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is gathered all in this, and out of it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is defective which is perfect there.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shorter henceforward will my language fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of what I yet remember, than an infant's</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who still his tongue doth moisten at the breast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not because more than one unmingled semblance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was in the living light on which I looked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For it is always what it was before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But through the sight, that fortified itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In me by looking, one appearance only</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To me was ever changing as I changed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within the deep and luminous subsistence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the High Light appeared to me three circles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of threefold colour and of one dimension,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by the second seemed the first reflected</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Iris is by Iris, and the third</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemed fire that equally from both is breathed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O how all speech is feeble and falls short</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of my conceit, and this to what I saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is such, 'tis not enough to call it little!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Light Eterne, sole in thyself that dwellest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sole knowest thyself, and, known unto thyself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And knowing, lovest and smilest on thyself!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That circulation, which being thus conceived</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Appeared in thee as a reflected light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When somewhat contemplated by mine eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within itself, of its own very colour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemed to me painted with our effigy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore my sight was all absorbed therein.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the geometrician, who endeavours</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To square the circle, and discovers not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By taking thought, the principle he wants,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even such was I at that new apparition;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I wished to see how the image to the circle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Conformed itself, and how it there finds place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But my own wings were not enough for this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had it not been that then my mind there smote</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A flash of lightning, wherein came its wish.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here vigour failed the lofty fantasy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now was turning my desire and will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as a wheel that equally is moved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Love which moves the sun and the other stars.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
