<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Purgatorio</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="purgatorio" epub:type="volume">
			<section id="purgatorio-preface" epub:type="preface z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>I enter, and I see thee in the gloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the long aisles, O poet saturnine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strive to make my steps keep pace with thine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The air is filled with some unknown perfume;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The congregation of the dead make room</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thee to pass; the votive tapers shine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like rooks that haunt Ravenna’s groves of pine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hovering echoes fly from tomb to tomb.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the confessionals I hear arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rehearsals of forgotten tragedies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lamentations from the crypts below;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then a voice celestial that begins</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the pathetic words, “Although your sins</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As scarlet be,” and ends with “as the snow.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With snow-white veil and garments as of flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She stands before thee, who so long ago</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Filled thy young heart with passion and the woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From which thy song and all its splendors came;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And while with stern rebuke she speaks thy name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ice about thy heart melts as the snow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On mountain heights, and in swift overflow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Comes gushing from thy lips in sobs of shame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou makest full confession; and a gleam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As of the dawn on some dark forest cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seems on thy lifted forehead to increase;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lethe and Eunoe⁠—the remembered dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the forgotten sorrow⁠—bring at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That perfect pardon which is perfect peace.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<h2 epub:type="title" xml:lang="it">Purgatorio</h2>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Shores of Purgatory⁠—Cato of Utica.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>To run o’er better waters hoists its sail<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-531" id="noteref-531" epub:type="noteref">531</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The little vessel of my genius now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That leaves behind itself a sea so cruel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of that second kingdom will I sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein the human spirit doth purge itself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to ascend to heaven becometh worthy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let dead Poesy here rise again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O holy Muses, since that I am yours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And here Calliope somewhat ascend,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-532" id="noteref-532" epub:type="noteref">532</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>My song accompanying with that sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which the miserable magpies felt<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-533" id="noteref-533" epub:type="noteref">533</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The blow so great, that they despaired of pardon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet color of the oriental sapphire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was upgathered in the cloudless aspect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the pure air, as far as the first circle,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-534" id="noteref-534" epub:type="noteref">534</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto mine eyes did recommence delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soon as I issued forth from the dead air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which had with sadness filled mine eyes and breast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The beauteous planet, that to love incites,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-535" id="noteref-535" epub:type="noteref">535</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was making all the orient to laugh,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-536" id="noteref-536" epub:type="noteref">536</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Veiling the Fishes that were in her escort.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the right hand I turned, and fixed my mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the other pole, and saw four stars<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-537" id="noteref-537" epub:type="noteref">537</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne’er seen before save by the primal people.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-538" id="noteref-538" epub:type="noteref">538</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rejoicing in their flamelets seemed the heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O thou septentrional and widowed site,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because thou art deprived of seeing these!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When from regarding them I had withdrawn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turning a little to the other pole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where the Wain had disappeared already,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-539" id="noteref-539" epub:type="noteref">539</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw beside me an old man alone,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-540" id="noteref-540" epub:type="noteref">540</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Worthy of so much reverence in his look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That more owes not to father any son.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A long beard and with white hair intermingled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wore, in semblance like unto the tresses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which a double list fell on his breast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rays of the four consecrated stars</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did so adorn his countenance with light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That him I saw as were the sun before him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Who are you? ye who, counter the blind river,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-541" id="noteref-541" epub:type="noteref">541</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have fled away from the eternal prison?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Moving those venerable plumes, he said:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-542" id="noteref-542" epub:type="noteref">542</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Who guided you? or who has been your lamp</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In issuing forth out of the night profound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever black makes the infernal valley?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The laws of the abyss, are they thus broken?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or is there changed in heaven some counsel new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That being damned ye come unto my crags?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then did my Leader lay his grasp upon me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his words, and with his hands and signs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reverent he made in me my knees and brow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then answered him: “I came not of myself;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-543" id="noteref-543" epub:type="noteref">543</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Lady from Heaven descended, at whose prayers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I aided this one with my company.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But since it is thy will more be unfolded</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of our condition, how it truly is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mine cannot be that this should be denied thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This one has never his last evening seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by his folly was so near to it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That very little time was there to turn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I have said, I unto him was sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rescue him, and other way was none</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than this to which I have myself betaken.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve shown him all the people of perdition,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now those spirits I intend to show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who purge themselves beneath thy guardianship.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How I have brought him would be long to tell thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Virtue descendeth from on high that aids me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lead him to behold thee and to hear thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now may it please thee to vouchsafe his coming;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He seeketh Liberty, which is so dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As knoweth he who life for her refuses.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou know’st it; since, for her, to thee not bitter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was death in Utica, where thou didst leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The vesture, that will shine so, the great day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By us the eternal edicts are not broken;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since this one lives, and Minos binds not me;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-544" id="noteref-544" epub:type="noteref">544</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of that circle I, where are the chaste<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-545" id="noteref-545" epub:type="noteref">545</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eyes of thy Marcia, who in looks still prays thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O holy breast, to hold her as thine own;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For her love, then, incline thyself to us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Permit us through thy sevenfold realm to go;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will take back this grace from thee to her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If to be mentioned there below thou deignest.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Marcia so pleasing was unto mine eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While I was on the other side,” then said he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“That every grace she wished of me I granted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now that she dwells beyond the evil river,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She can no longer move me, by that law</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, when I issued forth from there, was made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if a Lady of Heaven do move and rule thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As thou dost say, no flattery is needful;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let it suffice thee that for her thou ask me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go, then, and see thou gird this one about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a smooth rush, and that thou wash his face,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-546" id="noteref-546" epub:type="noteref">546</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that thou cleanse away all stain therefrom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ’twere not fitting that the eye o’ercast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By any mist should go before the first</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Angel, who is of those of Paradise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This little island round about its base</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Below there, yonder, where the billow beats it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth rushes bear upon its washy ooze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No other plant that putteth forth the leaf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that doth indurate, can there have life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because it yieldeth not unto the shocks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereafter be not this way your return;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sun, which now is rising, will direct you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To take the mount by easier ascent.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With this he vanished; and I raised me up</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without a word, and wholly drew myself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto my Guide, and turned mine eyes to him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he began: “Son, follow thou my steps;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let us turn back, for on this side declines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The plain unto its lower boundaries.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dawn was vanquishing the matin hour<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-547" id="noteref-547" epub:type="noteref">547</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which fled before it, so that from afar</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I recognized the trembling of the sea.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the solitary plain we went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one who unto the lost road returns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And till he finds it seems to go in vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as we were come to where the dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fights with the sun, and, being in a part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where shadow falls, little evaporates,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-548" id="noteref-548" epub:type="noteref">548</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both of his hands upon the grass outspread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In gentle manner did my Master place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence I, who of his action was aware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Extended unto him my tearful cheeks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There did he make in me uncovered wholly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hue which Hell had covered up in me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then came we down upon the desert shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which never yet saw navigate its waters</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Any that afterward had known return.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There he begirt me as the other pleased;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O marvellous! for even as he culled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The humble plant, such it sprang up again<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-549" id="noteref-549" epub:type="noteref">549</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suddenly there where he uprooted it.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Celestial Pilot⁠—Casella.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Already had the sun the horizon reached<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-550" id="noteref-550" epub:type="noteref">550</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose circle of meridian covers o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Jerusalem with its most lofty point,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And night that opposite to him revolves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was issuing forth from Ganges with the Scales</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fall from out her hand when she exceedeth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that the white and the vermilion cheeks<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-551" id="noteref-551" epub:type="noteref">551</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of beautiful Aurora, where I was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By too great age were changing into orange.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We still were on the border of the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like people who are thinking of their road,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who go in heart, and with the body stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo! as when, upon the approach of morning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the gross vapors Mars grows fiery red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down in the West upon the ocean floor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appeared to me⁠—may I again behold it!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A light along the sea so swiftly coming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its motion by no flight of wing is equalled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From which when I a little had withdrawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mine eyes, that I might question my Conductor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Again I saw it brighter grown and larger.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then on each side of it appeared to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I knew not what of white, and underneath it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Little by little there came forth another.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Master yet had uttered not a word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While the first whiteness into wings unfolded;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when he clearly recognized the pilot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He cried: “Make haste, make haste to bow the knee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behold the Angel of God! fold thou thy hands!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Henceforward shalt thou see such officers!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See how he scorneth human arguments,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-552" id="noteref-552" epub:type="noteref">552</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that nor oar he wants, nor other sail</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than his own wings, between so distant shores.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See how he holds them pointed up to heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fanning the air with the eternal pinions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That do not moult themselves like mortal hair!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then as still nearer and more near us came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Bird Divine, more radiant he appeared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that near by the eye could not endure him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But down I cast it; and he came to shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a small vessel, very swift and light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the water swallowed naught thereof.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the stern stood the Celestial Pilot;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beatitude seemed written in his face,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-553" id="noteref-553" epub:type="noteref">553</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more than a hundred spirits sat within.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="la">In exitu Israel de Ægypto!</i>”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They chanted all together in one voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whatso in that psalm is after written.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then made he sign of holy rood upon them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat all cast themselves upon the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he departed swiftly as he came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The throng which still remained there unfamiliar</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemed with the place, all round about them gazing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one who in new matters makes essay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On every side was darting forth the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sun, who had with his resplendent shafts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the mid-heaven chased forth the Capricorn,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-554" id="noteref-554" epub:type="noteref">554</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the new people lifted up their faces</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towards us, saying to us: “If ye know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Show us the way to go unto the mountain.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And answer made Virgilius: “Ye believe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perchance that we have knowledge of this place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But we are strangers even as yourselves.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just now we came, a little while before you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another way, which was so rough and steep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mounting will henceforth seem sport to us.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The souls who had, from seeing me draw breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Become aware that I was still alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pallid in their astonishment became;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as to messenger who bears the olive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The people throng to listen to the news,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And no one shows himself afraid of crowding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So at the sight of me stood motionless</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those fortunate spirits, all of them, as if</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oblivious to go and make them fair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One from among them saw I coming forward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As to embrace me, with such great affection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it incited me to do the like.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O empty shadows, save in aspect only!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three times behind it did I clasp my hands,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-555" id="noteref-555" epub:type="noteref">555</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As oft returned with them to my own breast!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I think with wonder I depicted me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat the shadow smiled and backward drew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I, pursuing it, pressed farther forward.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gently it said that I should stay my steps;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then knew I who it was, and I entreated</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it would stop awhile to speak with me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It made reply to me: “Even as I loved thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In mortal body, so I love thee free;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore I stop; but wherefore goest thou?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My own Casella! to return once more<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-556" id="noteref-556" epub:type="noteref">556</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where I am, I make this journey,” said I;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“But how from thee has so much time be taken?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “No outrage has been done me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If he who takes both when and whom he pleases</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has many times denied to me this passage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For of a righteous will his own is made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, sooth to say, for three months past has taken<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-557" id="noteref-557" epub:type="noteref">557</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whoever wished to enter with all peace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence I, who now had turned unto that shore<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-558" id="noteref-558" epub:type="noteref">558</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where salt the waters of the Tiber grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Benignantly by him have been received.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-559" id="noteref-559" epub:type="noteref">559</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto that outlet now his wing is pointed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because for evermore assemble there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those who tow’rds Acheron do not descend.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I: “If some new law take not from thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Memory or practice of the song of love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which used to quiet in me all my longings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee may it please to comfort therewithal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Somewhat this soul of mine, that with its body</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hitherward coming is so much distressed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<em>Love, that within my mind discourses with me</em>,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthwith began he so melodiously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The melody within me still is sounding.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Master, and myself, and all that people</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with him were, appeared as satisfied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if naught else might touch the mind of any.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We all of us were moveless and attentive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his notes; and lo! the grave old man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exclaiming: “What is this, ye laggard spirits?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What negligence, what standing still is this?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Run to the mountain to strip off the slough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lets not God be manifest to you.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as when, collecting grain or tares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The doves, together at their pasture met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quiet, nor showing their accustomed pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If aught appear of which they are afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a sudden leave their food alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because they are assailed by greater care;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that fresh company did I behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The song relinquish, and go tow’rds the hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one who goes, and knows not whitherward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor was our own departure less in haste.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Foot of the Mountain⁠—Those who have died in Contumacy of Holy Church⁠—Manfredi.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Inasmuch as the instantaneous flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had scattered them asunder o’er the plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turned to the mountain whither reason spurs us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pressed me close unto my faithful comrade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how without him had I kept my course?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who would have led me up along the mountain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He seemed to me within himself remorseful;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O noble conscience, and without a stain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How sharp a sting is trivial fault to thee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After his feet had laid aside the haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which mars the dignity of every act,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My mind, that hitherto had been restrained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let loose its faculties as if delighted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I my sight directed to the hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That highest tow’rds the heaven uplifts itself.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-560" id="noteref-560" epub:type="noteref">560</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sun, that in our rear was flaming red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was broken in front of me into the figure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which had in me the stoppage of its rays;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto one side I turned me, with the fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of being left alone, when I beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Only in front of me the ground obscured.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Why dost thou still mistrust?” my Comforter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began to say to me turned wholly round;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Dost thou not think me with thee, and that I guide thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis evening there already where is buried</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The body within which I cast a shadow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis from Brundusium ta’en, and Naples has it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-561" id="noteref-561" epub:type="noteref">561</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now if in front of me no shadow fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Marvel not at it more than at the heavens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because one ray impedeth not another</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To suffer torments, both of cold and heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bodies like this that Power provides, which wills</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That how it works be not unveiled to us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Insane is he who hopeth that our reason</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can traverse the illimitable way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which the one Substance in three Persons follows!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mortals, remain contented at the <i xml:lang="la">Quia</i>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-562" id="noteref-562" epub:type="noteref">562</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For if ye had been able to see all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No need there were for Mary to give birth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ye have seen desiring without fruit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those whose desire would have been quieted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which evermore is given them for a grief.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I speak of Aristotle and of Plato,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many others”;⁠—and here bowed his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more he said not, and remained disturbed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We came meanwhile unto the mountain’s foot;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There so precipitate we found the rock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nimble legs would there have been in vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twixt Lerici and Turbìa, the most desert,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-563" id="noteref-563" epub:type="noteref">563</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The most secluded pathway is a stair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Easy and open, if compared with that.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Who knoweth now upon which hand the hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Slopes down,” my Master said, his footsteps staying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“So that who goeth without wings may mount?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And while he held his eyes upon the ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Examining the nature of the path,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I was looking up around the rock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the left hand appeared to me a throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of souls, that moved their feet in our direction,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did not seem to move, they came so slowly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Lift up thine eyes,” I to the Master said;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Behold, on this side, who will give us counsel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thou of thine own self can have it not.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he looked at me, and with frank expression</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Replied: “Let us go there, for they come slowly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thou be steadfast in thy hope, sweet son.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still was that people as far off from us,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-564" id="noteref-564" epub:type="noteref">564</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After a thousand steps of ours I say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As a good thrower with his hand would reach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they all crowded unto the hard masses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the high bank, and motionless stood and close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he stands still to look who goes in doubt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O happy dead! O spirits elect already!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Virgilius made beginning, “by that peace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which I believe is waiting for you all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell us upon what side the mountain slopes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the going up be possible,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to lose time irks him most who most knows.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As sheep come issuing forth from out the fold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By ones and twos and threes, and the others stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Timidly, holding down their eyes and nostrils,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what the foremost does the others do,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-565" id="noteref-565" epub:type="noteref">565</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Huddling themselves against her, if she stop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Simple and quiet and the wherefore know not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So moving to approach us thereupon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw the leader of that fortunate flock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Modest in face and dignified in gait.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as those in the advance saw broken</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The light upon the ground at my right side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that from me the shadow reached the rock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They stopped, and backward drew themselves somewhat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the others, who came after them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not knowing why nor wherefore, did the same.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Without your asking, I confess to you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This is a human body which you see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby the sunshine on the ground is cleft.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Marvel ye not thereat, but be persuaded</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That not without a power which comes from Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth he endeavour to surmount this wall.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Master thus; and said those worthy people:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Return ye then, and enter in before us,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Making a signal with the back o’ the hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one of them began: “Whoe’er thou art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus going turn thine eyes, consider well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If e’er thou saw me in the other world.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I turned me tow’rds him, and looked at him closely;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blond was he, beautiful, and of noble aspect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But one of his eyebrows had a blow divided.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When with humility I had disclaimed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">E’er having seen him, “Now behold!” he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And showed me high upon his breast a wound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then said he with a smile: “I am Manfredi,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-566" id="noteref-566" epub:type="noteref">566</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The grandson of the Empress Costanza;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-567" id="noteref-567" epub:type="noteref">567</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, when thou returnest, I beseech thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go to my daughter beautiful, the mother<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-568" id="noteref-568" epub:type="noteref">568</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Sicily’s honor and of Aragon’s,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the truth tell her, if aught else be told.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After I had my body lacerated</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By these two mortal stabs, I gave myself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weeping to Him, who willingly doth pardon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Horrible my iniquities had been;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Infinite Goodness hath such ample arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it receives whatever turns to it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had but Cosenza’s pastor, who in chase<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-569" id="noteref-569" epub:type="noteref">569</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of me was sent by Clement at that time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In God read understandingly this page,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bones of my dead body still would be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At the bridge-head, near unto Benevento,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the safeguard of the heavy cairn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now the rain bathes and moveth them the wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beyond the realm, almost beside the Verde,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-570" id="noteref-570" epub:type="noteref">570</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he transported them with tapers quenched.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-571" id="noteref-571" epub:type="noteref">571</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>By malison of theirs is not so lost</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eternal Love, that it cannot return,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long as hope has anything of green.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>True is it, who in contumacy dies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Holy Church, though penitent at last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must wait upon the outside this bank</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thirty times told the time that he has been</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his presumption, unless such decree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shorter by means of righteous prayers become.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See now if thou hast power to make me happy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By making known unto my good Costanza</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How thou hast seen me, and this ban beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For those on earth can much advance us here.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Farther Ascent of the Mountain⁠—The Negligent, who postponed Repentance till the last Hour⁠—Belacqua.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Whenever by delight or else by pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seizes any faculty of ours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wholly to that the soul collects itself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seemeth that no other power it heeds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this against that error is which thinks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One soul above another kindles in us.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-572" id="noteref-572" epub:type="noteref">572</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hence, whenever aught is heard or seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which keeps the soul intently bent upon it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Time passes on, and we perceive it not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because one faculty is that which listens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And other that which the soul keeps entire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This is as if in bonds, and that is free.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this I had experience positive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hearing and in gazing at that spirit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For fifty full degrees uprisen was<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-573" id="noteref-573" epub:type="noteref">573</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sun, and I had not perceived it, when</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We came to where those souls with one accord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cried out unto us: “Here is what you ask.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A greater opening ofttimes hedges up</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With but a little forkful of his thorns</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The villager, what time the grape imbrowns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than was the passage-way through which ascended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Only my Leader and myself behind him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After that company departed from us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One climbs Sanleo and descends in Noli,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-574" id="noteref-574" epub:type="noteref">574</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mounts the summit of Bismantova,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With feet alone; but here one needs must fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the swift pinions and the plumes I say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of great desire, conducted after him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who gave me hope, and made a light for me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We mounted upward through the rifted rock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on each side the border pressed upon us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And feet and hands the ground beneath required.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we were come upon the upper rim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the high bank, out on the open slope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“My Master,” said I, “what way shall we take?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-575" id="noteref-575" epub:type="noteref">575</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “No step of thine descend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still up the mount behind me win thy way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till some sage escort shall appear to us.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The summit was so high it vanquished sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the hillside precipitous far more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than line from middle quadrant to the centre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spent with fatigue was I, when I began:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-576" id="noteref-576" epub:type="noteref">576</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“O my sweet Father! turn thee and behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How I remain alone, unless thou stay!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O son,” he said, “up yonder drag thyself,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pointing me to a terrace somewhat higher,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which on that side encircles all the hill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These words of his so spurred me on, that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strained every nerve, behind him scrambling up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until the circle was beneath my feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereon ourselves we seated both of us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turned to the East, from which we had ascended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all men are delighted to look back.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the low shores mine eyes I first directed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then to the sun uplifted them, and wondered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That on the left hand we were smitten by it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Poet well perceived that I was wholly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bewildered at the chariot of the light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where ’twixt us and the Aquilon it entered.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereon he said to me: “If Castor and Pollux<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-577" id="noteref-577" epub:type="noteref">577</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were in the company of yonder mirror,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That up and down conducteth with its light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wouldst behold the zodiac’s jagged wheel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-578" id="noteref-578" epub:type="noteref">578</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Revolving still more near unto the Bears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unless it swerved aside from its old track.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that may be wouldst thou have power to think,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Collected in thyself, imagine Zion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Together with this mount on earth to stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that they both one sole horizon have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hemispheres diverse; whereby the road<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-579" id="noteref-579" epub:type="noteref">579</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Phaeton, alas! knew not to drive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou’lt see how of necessity must pass<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-580" id="noteref-580" epub:type="noteref">580</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This on one side, when that upon the other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thine intelligence right clearly heed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Truly, my Master,” said I, “never yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saw I so clearly as I now discern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where my wit appeared incompetent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the mid-circle of supernal motion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in some art is the Equator called,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And aye remains between the Sun and Winter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For reason which thou sayest, departeth hence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tow’rds the Septentrion, what time the Hebrews<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-581" id="noteref-581" epub:type="noteref">581</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld it tow’rds the region of the heat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, if it pleaseth thee, I fain would learn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How far we have to go; for the hill rises</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Higher than eyes of mine have power to rise.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “This mount is such, that ever</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At the beginning down below ’tis tiresome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And aye the more one climbs, the less it hurts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore, when it shall seem so pleasant to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That going up shall be to thee as easy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As going down the current in a boat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then at this pathway’s ending thou wilt be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There to repose thy panting breath expect;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No more I answer; and this I know for true.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as he finished uttering these words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A voice close by us sounded: “Peradventure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou wilt have need of sitting down ere that.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At sound thereof each one of us turned round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw upon the left hand a great rock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which neither I nor he before had noticed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thither we drew; and there were persons there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who in the shadow stood behind the rock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one through indolence is wont to stand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one of them, who seemed to me fatigued,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was sitting down, and both his knees embraced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Holding his face low down between them bowed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O my sweet Lord,” I said, “do turn thine eye<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-582" id="noteref-582" epub:type="noteref">582</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On him who shows himself more negligent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than even if Sloth herself his sister were.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he turned round to us, and he gave heed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Just lifting up his eyes above his thigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said: “Now go thou up, for thou art valiant.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then knew I who he was; and the distress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That still a little did my breathing quicken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My going to him hindered not; and after</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I came to him he hardly raised his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying: “Hast thou seen clearly how the sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’er thy left shoulder drives his chariot?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sluggish attitude and his curt words</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little unto laughter moved my lips;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then I began: “Belacqua, I grieve not<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-583" id="noteref-583" epub:type="noteref">583</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thee henceforth; but tell me, wherefore seated</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In this place art thou? Waitest thou an escort?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or has thy usual habit seized upon thee?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he: “O brother, what’s the use of climbing?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since to my torment would not let me go</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Angel of God, who sitteth at the gate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First heaven must needs so long revolve me round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Outside thereof, as in my life it did,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since the good sighs I to the end postponed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless, e’er that, some prayer may bring me aid<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-584" id="noteref-584" epub:type="noteref">584</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which rises from a heart that lives in grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What profit others that in heaven are heard not?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meanwhile the Poet was before me mounting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saying: “Come now; see the sun has touched</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Meridian, and from the shore the night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Covers already with her foot Morocco.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Those who died by Violence, but repentant⁠—Buonconte di Montefeltro⁠—La Pia.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I had already from those shades departed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-585" id="noteref-585" epub:type="noteref">585</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And followed in the footsteps of my Guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When from behind, pointing his finger at me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One shouted: “See, it seems as if shone not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sunshine on the left of him below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like one living seems he to conduct him!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine eyes I turned at utterance of these words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw them watching with astonishment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But me, but me, and the light which was broken!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Why doth thy mind so occupy itself,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Master said, “that thou thy pace dost slacken?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What matters it to thee what here is whispered?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come after me, and let the people talk;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stand like a steadfast tower, that never wags</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its top for all the blowing of the winds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For evermore the man in whom is springing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thought upon thought, removes from him the mark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because the force of one the other weakens.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What could I say in answer but “I come”?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I said it somewhat with that color tinged</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which makes a man of pardon sometimes worthy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meanwhile along the mountain-side across</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came people in advance of us a little,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Singing the Miserere verse by verse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they became aware I gave no place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For passage of the sunshine through my body,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They changed their song into a long, hoarse “Oh!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And two of them, in form of messengers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ran forth to meet us, and demanded of us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Of your condition make us cognizant.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said my Master: “Ye can go your way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And carry back again to those who sent you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That this one’s body is of very flesh.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If they stood still because they saw his shadow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I suppose, enough is answered them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him let them honor, it may profit them.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vapors enkindled saw I ne’er so swiftly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At early nightfall cleave the air serene,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-586" id="noteref-586" epub:type="noteref">586</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor, at the set of sun, the clouds of August,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But upward they returned in briefer time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, on arriving, with the others wheeled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tow’rds us, like troops that run without a rein.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“This folk that presses unto us is great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cometh to implore thee,” said the Poet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“So still go onward, and in going listen.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O soul that goest to beatitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the same members wherewith thou wast born,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shouting they came, “a little stay thy steps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look, if thou e’er hast any of us seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that o’er yonder thou bear news of him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah, why dost thou go on? Ah, why not stay?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long since we all were slain by violence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sinners even to the latest hour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then did a light from heaven admonish us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that, both penitent and pardoning, forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From life we issued reconciled to God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with desire to see Him stirs our hearts.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I: “Although I gaze into your faces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No one I recognize; but if may please you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aught I have power to do, ye well-born spirits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speak ye, and I will do it, by that peace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, following the feet of such a Guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From world to world makes itself sought by me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one began: “Each one has confidence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In thy good offices without an oath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unless the I cannot cut off the I will;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-587" id="noteref-587" epub:type="noteref">587</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence I, who speak alone before the others,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-588" id="noteref-588" epub:type="noteref">588</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pray thee, if ever thou dost see the land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ’twixt Romagna lies and that of Charles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou be so courteous to me of thy prayers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Fano, that they pray for me devoutly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I may purge away my grave offences.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thence was I; but the deep wounds, through which</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Issued the blood wherein I had my seat,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-589" id="noteref-589" epub:type="noteref">589</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were dealt me in bosom of the Antenori,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-590" id="noteref-590" epub:type="noteref">590</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>There where I thought to be the most secure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twas he of Este had it done, who held me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hatred far beyond what justice willed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if towards the Mira I had fled,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-591" id="noteref-591" epub:type="noteref">591</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I was overtaken at Oriaco,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I still should be o’er yonder where men breathe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I ran to the lagoon, and reeds and mire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did so entangle me I fell, and saw there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A lake made from my veins upon the ground.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then said another: “Ah, be that desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fulfilled that draws thee to the lofty mountain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As thou with pious pity aidest mine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was of Montefeltro, and am Buonconte;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-592" id="noteref-592" epub:type="noteref">592</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Giovanna, nor none other cares for me;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-593" id="noteref-593" epub:type="noteref">593</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hence among these I go with downcast front.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I to him: “What violence or what chance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Led thee astray so far from Campaldino,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-594" id="noteref-594" epub:type="noteref">594</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never has thy sepulture been known?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Oh,” he replied, “at Casentino’s foot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A river crosses named Archiano, born</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the Hermitage in Apennine.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-595" id="noteref-595" epub:type="noteref">595</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>There where the name thereof becometh void<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-596" id="noteref-596" epub:type="noteref">596</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did I arrive, pierced through and through the throat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fleeing on foot, and bloodying the plain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There my sight lost I, and my utterance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ceased in the name of Mary, and thereat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I fell, and tenantless my flesh remained.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Truth will I speak, repeat it to the living;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">God’s Angel took me up, and he of hell<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-597" id="noteref-597" epub:type="noteref">597</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shouted: ‘O thou from heaven, why dost thou rob me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou bearest away the eternal part of him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For one poor little tear, that takes him from me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with the rest I’ll deal in other fashion!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well knowest thou how in the air is gathered<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-598" id="noteref-598" epub:type="noteref">598</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That humid vapor which to water turns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soon as it rises where the cold doth grasp it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He joined that evil will, which aye seeks evil,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-599" id="noteref-599" epub:type="noteref">599</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To intellect, and moved the mist and wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By means of power, which his own nature gave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereafter, when the day was spent, the valley</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Pratomagno to the great yoke covered<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-600" id="noteref-600" epub:type="noteref">600</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fog, and made the heaven above intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that the pregnant air to water changed;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-601" id="noteref-601" epub:type="noteref">601</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down fell the rain, and to the gullies came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whate’er of it earth tolerated not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as it mingled with the mighty torrents,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towards the royal river with such speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It headlong rushed, that nothing held it back.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My frozen body near unto its outlet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The robust Archian found, and into Arno</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrust it, and loosened from my breast the cross<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-602" id="noteref-602" epub:type="noteref">602</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I made of me, when agony o’ercame me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It rolled me on the banks and on the bottom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then with its booty covered and begirt me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ah, when thou hast returned unto the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rested thee from thy long journeying,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After the second followed the third spirit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Do thou remember me who am the Pia;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Siena made me, unmade me Maremma;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-603" id="noteref-603" epub:type="noteref">603</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He knoweth it, who had encircled first,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Espousing me, my finger with his gem.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-6" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Sordello.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Whene’er is broken up the game of Zara,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-604" id="noteref-604" epub:type="noteref">604</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He who has lost remains behind despondent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The throws repeating, and in sadness learns;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The people with the other all depart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One goes in front, and one behind doth pluck him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at his side one brings himself to mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He pauses not, and this and that one hears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They crowd no more to whom his hand he stretches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from the throng he thus defends himself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even such was I in that dense multitude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turning to them this way and that my face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, promising, I freed myself therefrom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was the Aretine, who from the arms<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-605" id="noteref-605" epub:type="noteref">605</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untamed of Ghin di Tacco had his death,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-606" id="noteref-606" epub:type="noteref">606</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he who fleeing from pursuit was drowned.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-607" id="noteref-607" epub:type="noteref">607</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was imploring with his hands outstretched</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Frederick Novello, and that one of Pisa<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-608" id="noteref-608" epub:type="noteref">608</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who made the good Marzucco seem so strong.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw Count Orso; and the soul divided<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-609" id="noteref-609" epub:type="noteref">609</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By hatred and by envy from its body,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it declared, and not for crime committed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pierre de la Brosse I say; and here provide<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-610" id="noteref-610" epub:type="noteref">610</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While still on earth the Lady of Brabant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that for this she be of no worse flock!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as I was free from all those shades</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who only prayed that someone else may pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So as to hasten their becoming holy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Began I: “It appears that thou deniest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O light of mine, expressly in some text,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That orison can bend decree of Heaven;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-611" id="noteref-611" epub:type="noteref">611</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ne’ertheless these people pray for this.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might then their expectation bootless be?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or is to me thy saying not quite clear?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “My writing is explicit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And not fallacious is the hope of these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If with sane intellect ’tis well regarded;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For top of judgment doth not vail itself,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-612" id="noteref-612" epub:type="noteref">612</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because the fire of love fulfils at once</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What he must satisfy who here installs him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there, where I affirmed that proposition,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defect was not amended by a prayer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because the prayer from God was separate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Verily, in so deep a questioning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do not decide, unless she tell it thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who light ’twixt truth and intellect shall be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know not if thou understand; I speak</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Beatrice; her shalt thou see above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Smiling and happy, on this mountain’s top.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I: “Good Leader, let us make more haste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I no longer tire me as before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And see, e’en now the hill a shadow casts.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-613" id="noteref-613" epub:type="noteref">613</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“We will go forward with this day,” he answered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“As far as now is possible for us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But otherwise the fact is than thou thinkest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere thou art up there, thou shalt see return</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him, who now hides himself behind the hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that thou dost not interrupt his rays.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But yonder there behold! a soul that stationed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All, all alone is looking hitherward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It will point out to us the quickest way.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We came up unto it; O Lombard soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How lofty and disdainful thou didst bear thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And grand and slow in moving of thine eyes!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing whatever did it say to us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But let us go our way, eying us only</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After the manner of a couchant lion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still near to it Virgilius drew, entreating</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it would point us out the best ascent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And it replied not unto his demand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of our native land and of our life</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It questioned us; and the sweet Guide began:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Mantua,”⁠—and the shade, all in itself recluse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rose tow’rds him from the place where first it was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying: “O Mantuan, I am Sordello<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-614" id="noteref-614" epub:type="noteref">614</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of thine own land!” and one embraced the other.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! servile Italy, grief’s hostelry!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-615" id="noteref-615" epub:type="noteref">615</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A ship without a pilot in great tempest!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No Lady thou of Provinces, but brothel!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That noble soul was so impatient, only</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At the sweet sound of his own native land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make its citizen glad welcome there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now within thee are not without war</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy living ones, and one doth gnaw the other</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of those whom one wall and one fosse shut in!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Search, wretched one, all round about the shores</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy seaboard, and then look within thy bosom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If any part of thee enjoyeth peace!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What boots it, that for thee Justinian</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bridle mend, if empty be the saddle?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-616" id="noteref-616" epub:type="noteref">616</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten this the shame would be the less.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! people, thou that oughtest to be devout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to let Caesar sit upon the saddle,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-617" id="noteref-617" epub:type="noteref">617</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If well thou hearest what God teacheth thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold how fell this wild beast has become,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being no longer by the spur corrected,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since thou hast laid thy hand upon the bridle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O German Albert! who abandonest<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-618" id="noteref-618" epub:type="noteref">618</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her that has grown recalcitrant and savage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oughtest to bestride her saddle-bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May a just judgment from the stars down fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon thy blood, and be it new and open,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thy successor may have fear thereof;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because thy father and thyself have suffered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By greed of those transalpine lands distrained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The garden of the empire to be waste.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come and behold Montecchi and Cappelletti,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-619" id="noteref-619" epub:type="noteref">619</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Monaldi and Fillippeschi, careless man!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-620" id="noteref-620" epub:type="noteref">620</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those sad already, and these doubt-depressed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come, cruel one! come and behold the oppression</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of thy nobility, and cure their wounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thou shalt see how safe is Santafiore!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-621" id="noteref-621" epub:type="noteref">621</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come and behold thy Rome, that is lamenting,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-622" id="noteref-622" epub:type="noteref">622</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Widowed, alone, and day and night exclaims,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“My Caesar, why hast thou forsaken me?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come and behold how loving are the people;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if for us no pity moveth thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come and be made ashamed of thy renown!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if it lawful be, O Jove Supreme!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-623" id="noteref-623" epub:type="noteref">623</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who upon earth for us wast crucified,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are thy just eyes averted otherwhere?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or preparation is’t, that, in the abyss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of thine own counsel, for some good thou makest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From our perception utterly cut off?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all the towns of Italy are full</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of tyrants, and becometh a Marcellus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-624" id="noteref-624" epub:type="noteref">624</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each peasant churl who plays the partisan!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Florence! well mayst thou contented be<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-625" id="noteref-625" epub:type="noteref">625</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With this digression, which concerns thee not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thanks to thy people who such forethought take!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many at heart have justice, but shoot slowly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That unadvised they come not to the bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But on their very lips thy people have it!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many refuse to bear the common burden;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thy solicitous people answereth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without being asked, and crieth: “I submit.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now be thou joyful, for thou hast good reason;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou affluent, thou in peace, thou full of wisdom!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If I speak true, the event conceals it not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Athens and Lacedaemon, they who made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ancient laws, and were so civilized,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made towards living well a little sign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Compared with thee, who makest such fine-spun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Provisions, that to middle of November</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reaches not what thou in October spinnest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How oft, within the time of thy remembrance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Laws, money, offices, and usages</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hast thou remodelled, and renewed thy members?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-626" id="noteref-626" epub:type="noteref">626</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if thou mind thee well, and see the light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou shalt behold thyself like a sick woman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who cannot find repose upon her down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But by her tossing wardeth off her pain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-7" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Valley of the Princes.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>After the gracious and glad salutations</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had three and four times been reiterated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sordello backward drew and said, “Who are you?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Or ever to this mountain were directed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The souls deserving to ascend to God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My bones were buried by Octavian.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-627" id="noteref-627" epub:type="noteref">627</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am Virgilius; and for no crime else</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did I lose heaven, than for not having faith”;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In this wise then my Leader made reply.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As one who suddenly before him sees</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Something whereat he marvels, who believes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet does not, saying, “It is! it is not!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So he appeared; and then bowed down his brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with humility returned towards him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, where inferiors embrace, embraced him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O glory of the Latians, thou,” he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Through whom our language showed what it could do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O pride eternal of the place I came from,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What merit or what grace to me reveals thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If I to hear thy words be worthy, tell me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thou dost come from Hell, and from what cloister.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Through all the circles of the doleful realm,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Responded he, “have I come hitherward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heaven’s power impelled me, and with that I come.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I by not doing, not by doing, lost</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sight of that high sun which thou desirest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And which too late by me was recognized.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A place there is below not sad with torments,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-628" id="noteref-628" epub:type="noteref">628</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But darkness only, where the lamentations</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have not the sound of wailing, but are sighs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There dwell I with the little innocents</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Snatched by the teeth of Death, or ever they</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were from our human sinfulness exempt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There dwell I among those who the three saintly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-629" id="noteref-629" epub:type="noteref">629</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Virtues did not put on, and without vice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The others knew and followed all of them.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-630" id="noteref-630" epub:type="noteref">630</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if thou know and can, some indication</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Give us by which we may the sooner come</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Purgatory has its right beginning.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He answered: “No fixed place has been assigned us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis lawful for me to go up and round;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So far as I can go, as guide I join thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But see already how the day declines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to go up by night we are not able;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-631" id="noteref-631" epub:type="noteref">631</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore ’tis well to think of some fair sojourn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Souls are there on the right hand here withdrawn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thou permit me I will lead thee to them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thou shalt know them not without delight.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“How is this?” was the answer; “should one wish</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To mount by night would he prevented be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By others? or mayhap would not have power?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the ground the good Sordello drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His finger, saying, “See, this line alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou couldst not pass after the sun is gone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not that aught else would hindrance give, however,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To going up, save the nocturnal darkness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This with the want of power the will perplexes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We might indeed therewith return below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, wandering, walk the hill-side round about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While the horizon holds the day imprisoned.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereon my Lord, as if in wonder, said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Do thou conduct us thither, where thou sayest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That we can take delight in tarrying.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Little had we withdrawn us from that place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I perceived the mount was hollowed out</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In fashion as the valleys here are hollowed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thitherward,” said that shade, “will we repair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where of itself the hill-side makes a lap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there for the new day will we await.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twixt hill and plain there was a winding path<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-632" id="noteref-632" epub:type="noteref">632</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which led us to the margin of that dell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where dies the border more than half away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gold and fine silver, and scarlet and pearl-white,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-633" id="noteref-633" epub:type="noteref">633</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Indian wood resplendent and serene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fresh emerald the moment it is broken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By herbage and by flowers within that hollow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Planted, each one in color would be vanquished,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As by its greater vanquished is the less.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor in that place had nature painted only,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of the sweetness of a thousand odors</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made there a mingled fragrance and unknown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="la">Salve Regina</i>,” on the green and flowers<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-634" id="noteref-634" epub:type="noteref">634</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There seated, singing, spirits I beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which were not visible outside the valley.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Before the scanty sun now seeks his nest,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began the Mantuan who had led us thither,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Among them do not wish me to conduct you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better from off this ledge the acts and faces</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all of them will you discriminate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than in the plain below received among them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who sits highest, and the semblance bears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of having what he should have done neglected,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the others’ song moves not his lips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rudolph the Emperor was, who had the power<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-635" id="noteref-635" epub:type="noteref">635</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To heal the wounds that Italy have slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that through others slowly she revives.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other, who in look doth comfort him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Governed the region where the water springs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Moldau bears the Elbe, and Elbe the sea.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His name was Ottocar; and in swaddling-clothes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-636" id="noteref-636" epub:type="noteref">636</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far better he than bearded Winceslaus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-637" id="noteref-637" epub:type="noteref">637</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His son, who feeds in luxury and ease.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the small-nosed, who close in council seems<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-638" id="noteref-638" epub:type="noteref">638</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With him that has an aspect so benign,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-639" id="noteref-639" epub:type="noteref">639</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Died fleeing and disflowering the lily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look there, how he is beating at his breast!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behold the other one, who for his cheek</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sighing has made of his own palm a bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Father and father-in-law of France’s Pest<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-640" id="noteref-640" epub:type="noteref">640</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are they, and know his vicious life and lewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hence proceeds the grief that so doth pierce them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who appears so stalwart, and chimes in,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-641" id="noteref-641" epub:type="noteref">641</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Singing, with that one of the manly nose,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-642" id="noteref-642" epub:type="noteref">642</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cord of every valor wore begirt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if as King had after him remained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The stripling who in rear of him is sitting,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-643" id="noteref-643" epub:type="noteref">643</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well had the valor passed from vase to vase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which cannot of the other heirs be said.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Frederick and Jacomo possess the realms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But none the better heritage possesses.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not oftentimes upriseth through the branches<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-644" id="noteref-644" epub:type="noteref">644</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The probity of man; and this He wills</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who gives it, so that we may ask of Him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eke to the large-nosed reach my words, no less<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-645" id="noteref-645" epub:type="noteref">645</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than to the other, Pier, who with him sings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence Provence and Apulia grieve already<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-646" id="noteref-646" epub:type="noteref">646</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The plant is as inferior to its seed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As more than Beatrice and Margaret<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-647" id="noteref-647" epub:type="noteref">647</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Costanza boasteth of her husband still.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-648" id="noteref-648" epub:type="noteref">648</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold the monarch of the simple life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Harry of England, sitting there alone;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-649" id="noteref-649" epub:type="noteref">649</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He in his branches has a better issue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who the lowest on the ground among them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sits looking upward, is the Marquis William,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-650" id="noteref-650" epub:type="noteref">650</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For whose sake Alessandria and her war<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-651" id="noteref-651" epub:type="noteref">651</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make Monferrat and Canavese weep.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-8" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Guardian Angels and the Serpent⁠—Nino di Gallura⁠—Currado Malaspina.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Twas now the hour that turneth back desire<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-652" id="noteref-652" epub:type="noteref">652</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In those who sail the sea, and melts the heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The day they’ve said to their sweet friends farewell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the new pilgrim penetrates with love,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-653" id="noteref-653" epub:type="noteref">653</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If he doth hear from far away a bell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemeth to deplore the dying day,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-654" id="noteref-654" epub:type="noteref">654</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I began to make of no avail</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My hearing, and to watch one of the souls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uprisen, that begged attention with its hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It joined and lifted upward both its palms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fixing its eyes upon the orient,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if it said to God, “Naught else I care for.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="la">Te lucis ante</i>” so devoutly issued<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-655" id="noteref-655" epub:type="noteref">655</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth from its mouth, and with such dulcet notes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It made me issue forth from my own mind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then the others, sweetly and devoutly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Accompanied it through all the hymn entire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having their eyes on the supernal wheels.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here, Reader, fix thine eyes well on the truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For now indeed so subtle is the veil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Surely to penetrate within is easy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw that army of the gentle-born</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereafterward in silence upward gaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if in expectation, pale and humble;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from on high come forth and down descend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw two Angels with two flaming swords,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-656" id="noteref-656" epub:type="noteref">656</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Truncated and deprived of their points.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-657" id="noteref-657" epub:type="noteref">657</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Green as the little leaflets just now born<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-658" id="noteref-658" epub:type="noteref">658</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their garments were, which, by their verdant pinions</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beaten and blown abroad, they trailed behind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One just above us came to take his station,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And one descended to the opposite bank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the people were contained between them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clearly in them discerned I the blond head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in their faces was the eye bewildered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As faculty confounded by excess.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“From Mary’s bosom both of them have come,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sordello said, “as guardians of the valley</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the serpent, that will come anon.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereupon I, who knew not by what road,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turned round about, and closely drew myself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Utterly frozen, to the faithful shoulders.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And once again Sordello: “Now descend we</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Mid the grand shades, and we will speak to them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right pleasant will it be for them to see you.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only three steps I think that I descended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And was below, and saw one who was looking</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Only at me, as if he fain would know me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already now the air was growing dark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not so that between his eyes and mine<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-659" id="noteref-659" epub:type="noteref">659</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It did not show what it before locked up.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tow’rds me he moved, and I tow’rds him did move;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Noble Judge Nino! how it me delighted,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-660" id="noteref-660" epub:type="noteref">660</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I beheld thee not among the damned!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No greeting fair was left unsaid between us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then asked he: “How long is it since thou camest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’er the far waters to the mountain’s foot?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Oh!” said I to him, “through the dismal places</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I came this morn; and am in the first life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Albeit the other, going thus, I gain.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the instant my reply was heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He and Sordello both shrank back from me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like people who are suddenly bewildered.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One to Virgilius, and the other turned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To one who sat there, crying, “Up, Currado!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come and behold what God in grace has willed!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, turned to me: “By that especial grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou owest unto Him, who so conceals</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His own first wherefore, that it has no ford,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thou shalt be beyond the waters wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell my Giovanna that she pray for me,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-661" id="noteref-661" epub:type="noteref">661</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where answer to the innocent is made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I do not think her mother loves me more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since she has laid aside her wimple white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she, unhappy, needs must wish again.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-662" id="noteref-662" epub:type="noteref">662</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through her full easily is comprehended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How long in woman lasts the fire of love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If eye or touch do not relight it often.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fair a hatchment will not make for her<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-663" id="noteref-663" epub:type="noteref">663</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Viper marshalling the Milanese<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-664" id="noteref-664" epub:type="noteref">664</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A-field, as would have made Gallura’s Cock.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-665" id="noteref-665" epub:type="noteref">665</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this wise spake he, with the stamp impressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his aspect of that righteous zeal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which measurably burneth in the heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My greedy eyes still wandered up to heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still to that point where slowest are the stars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as a wheel the nearest to its axle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my Conductor: “Son, what dost thou gaze at</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up there?” And I to him: “At those three torches<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-666" id="noteref-666" epub:type="noteref">666</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which this hither pole is all on fire.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “The four resplendent stars</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou sawest this morning are down yonder low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And these have mounted up to where those were.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he was speaking, to himself Sordello</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drew him, and said, “Lo there our Adversary!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pointed with his finger to look thither.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the side on which the little valley</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No barrier hath, a serpent was; perchance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same which gave to Eve the bitter food.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twixt grass and flowers came on the evil streak,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-667" id="noteref-667" epub:type="noteref">667</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turning at times its head about, and licking</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its back like to a beast that smoothes itself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I did not see, and therefore cannot say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How the celestial falcons ’gan to move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But well I saw that they were both in motion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hearing the air cleft by their verdant wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The serpent fled, and round the Angels wheeled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up to their stations flying back alike.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shade that to the Judge had near approached</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When he had called, throughout that whole assault</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had not a moment loosed its gaze on me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“So may the light that leadeth thee on high</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Find in thine own free-will as much of wax</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As needful is up to the highest azure,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-668" id="noteref-668" epub:type="noteref">668</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Began it, “if some true intelligence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Valdimagra or its neighborhood<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-669" id="noteref-669" epub:type="noteref">669</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou knowest, tell it me, who once was great there.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Currado Malaspina was I called;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-670" id="noteref-670" epub:type="noteref">670</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’m not the elder, but from him descended;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To mine I bore the love which here refineth.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O,” said I unto him, “through your domains</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I never passed, but where is there a dwelling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throughout all Europe, where they are not known?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fame, which doeth honor to your house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proclaims its Signors and proclaims its land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that he knows of them who ne’er was there.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as I hope for heaven, I swear to you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your honored family in naught abates</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The glory of the purse and of the sword.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is so privileged by use and nature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That though a guilty head misguide the world,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-671" id="noteref-671" epub:type="noteref">671</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sole it goes right, and scorns the evil way.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he: “Now go; for the sun shall not lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seven times upon the pillow which the Ram<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-672" id="noteref-672" epub:type="noteref">672</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all his four feet covers and bestrides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before that such a courteous opinion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall in the middle of thy head be nailed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-673" id="noteref-673" epub:type="noteref">673</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With greater nails than of another’s speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless the course of justice standeth still.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-674" id="noteref-674" epub:type="noteref">674</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-9" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Dante’s Dream of the Eagle⁠—The Gate of Purgatory.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The concubine of old Tithonus now<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-675" id="noteref-675" epub:type="noteref">675</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gleamed white upon the eastern balcony,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-676" id="noteref-676" epub:type="noteref">676</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth from the arms of her sweet paramour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With gems her forehead all relucent was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Set in the shape of that cold animal<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-677" id="noteref-677" epub:type="noteref">677</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with its tail doth smite amain the nations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of the steps, with which she mounts, the Night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had taken two in that place where we were,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-678" id="noteref-678" epub:type="noteref">678</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now the third was bending down its wings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I, who something had of Adam in me,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-679" id="noteref-679" epub:type="noteref">679</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vanquished by sleep, upon the grass reclined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There were all five of us already sat.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-680" id="noteref-680" epub:type="noteref">680</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just at the hour when her sad lay begins</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The little swallow, near unto the morning,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-681" id="noteref-681" epub:type="noteref">681</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perchance in memory of her former woes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when the mind of man, a wanderer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More from the flesh, and less by thought imprisoned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Almost prophetic in its visions is,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-682" id="noteref-682" epub:type="noteref">682</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In dreams it seemed to me I saw suspended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An eagle in the sky, with plumes of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wings wide open, and intent to stoop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this, it seemed to me, was where had been<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-683" id="noteref-683" epub:type="noteref">683</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Ganymede his kith and kin abandoned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When to the high consistory he was rapt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thought within myself, perchance he strikes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From habit only here, and from elsewhere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disdains to bear up any in his feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then wheeling somewhat more, it seemed to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Terrible as the lightning he descended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And snatched me upward even to the fire.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-684" id="noteref-684" epub:type="noteref">684</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therein it seemed that he and I were burning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the imagined fire did scorch me so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of necessity my sleep was broken.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not otherwise Achilles started up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Around him turning his awakened eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And knowing not the place in which he was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What time from Chiron stealthily his mother<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-685" id="noteref-685" epub:type="noteref">685</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Carried him sleeping in her arms to Scyros,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefrom the Greeks withdrew him afterwards,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than I upstarted, when from off my face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sleep fled away; and pallid I became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As doth the man who freezes with affright.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only my Comforter was at my side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now the sun was more than two hours high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turned towards the sea-shore was my face.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Be not intimidated,” said my Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Be reassured, for all is well with us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do not restrain, but put forth all thy strength.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast at length arrived at Purgatory;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">See there the cliff that closes it around;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">See there the entrance, where it seems disjoined.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilom at dawn, which doth precede the day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When inwardly thy spirit was asleep<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-686" id="noteref-686" epub:type="noteref">686</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the flowers that deck the land below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There came a Lady and said: ‘I am Lucìa;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-687" id="noteref-687" epub:type="noteref">687</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let me take this one up, who is asleep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So will I make his journey easier for him.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sordello and the other noble shapes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-688" id="noteref-688" epub:type="noteref">688</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remained; she took thee, and, as day grew bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upward she came, and I upon her footsteps.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She laid thee here; and first her beauteous eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That open entrance pointed out to me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then she and sleep together went away.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-689" id="noteref-689" epub:type="noteref">689</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In guise of one whose doubts are reassured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And who to confidence his fear doth change,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After the truth has been discovered to him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So did I change; and when without disquiet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Leader saw me, up along the cliff</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He moved, and I behind him, tow’rd the height.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reader, thou seest well how I exalt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My theme, and therefore if with greater art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I fortify it, marvel not thereat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nearer approached we, and were in such place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That there, where first appeared to me a rift</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to a crevice that disparts a wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw a portal, and three stairs beneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Diverse in color, to go up to it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a gate-keeper, who yet spake no word.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as I opened more and more mine eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw him seated on the highest stair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such in the face that I endured it not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his hand he had a naked sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which so reflected back the sunbeams tow’rds us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That oft in vain I lifted up mine eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Tell it from where you are, what is’t you wish?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began he to exclaim; “where is the escort?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Take heed your coming hither harm you not!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“A Lady of Heaven, with these things conversant,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Master answered him, “but even now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said to us, ‘Thither go; there is the portal.’ ”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And may she speed your footsteps in all good,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Again began the courteous janitor;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Come forward then unto these stairs of ours.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thither did we approach; and the first stair<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-690" id="noteref-690" epub:type="noteref">690</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was marble white, so polished and so smooth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I mirrored myself therein as I appear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The second, tinct of deeper hue than perse,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-691" id="noteref-691" epub:type="noteref">691</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was of a calcined and uneven stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cracked all asunder lengthwise and across.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The third, that uppermost rests massively,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Porphyry seemed to me, as flaming red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As blood that from a vein is spirting forth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both of his feet was holding upon this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Angel of God, upon the threshold seated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which seemed to me a stone of diamond.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-692" id="noteref-692" epub:type="noteref">692</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the three stairs upward with good will</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did my Conductor draw me, saying: “Ask</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Humbly that he the fastening may undo.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Devoutly at the holy feet I cast me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For mercy’s sake besought that he would open,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But first upon my breast three times I smote.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seven P’s upon my forehead he described<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-693" id="noteref-693" epub:type="noteref">693</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the sword’s point, and, “Take heed that thou wash</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These wounds, when thou shalt be within,” he said.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ashes, or earth that dry is excavated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the same color were with his attire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from beneath it he drew forth two keys.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One was of gold, and the other was of silver;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-694" id="noteref-694" epub:type="noteref">694</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First with the white, and after with the yellow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Plied he the door, so that I was content.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Whenever faileth either of these keys</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that it turn not rightly in the lock,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He said to us, “this entrance doth not open.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More precious one is, but the other needs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More art and intellect ere it unlock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For it is that which doth the knot unloose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Peter I have them; and he bade me err</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rather in opening than in keeping shut,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If people but fall down before my feet.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then pushed the portals of the sacred door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exclaiming: “Enter; but I give you warning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forth returns whoever looks behind.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-695" id="noteref-695" epub:type="noteref">695</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when upon their hinges were turned round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The swivels of that consecrated gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which are of metal, massive and sonorous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Roared not so loud, nor so discordant seemed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-696" id="noteref-696" epub:type="noteref">696</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tarpeia, when was ta’en from it the good</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Metellus, wherefore meagre it remained.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-697" id="noteref-697" epub:type="noteref">697</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the first thunder-peal I turned attentive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And “<i xml:lang="la">Te Deum laudamus</i>” seemed to hear<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-698" id="noteref-698" epub:type="noteref">698</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In voices mingled with sweet melody.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exactly such an image rendered me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That which I heard, as we are wont to catch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When people singing with the organ stand;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-699" id="noteref-699" epub:type="noteref">699</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For now we hear, and now hear not, the words.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-10" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The First Circle⁠—The Proud⁠—The Sculptures on the Wall.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When we had crossed the threshold of the door<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-700" id="noteref-700" epub:type="noteref">700</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which the perverted love of souls disuses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because it makes the crooked way seem straight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Re-echoing I heard it closed again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if I had turned back mine eyes upon it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What for my failing had been fit excuse?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We mounted upward through a rifted rock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which undulated to this side and that,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as a wave receding and advancing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Here it behoves us use a little art,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began my Leader, “to adapt ourselves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now here, now there, to the receding side.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this our footsteps so infrequent made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sooner had the moon’s decreasing disk<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-701" id="noteref-701" epub:type="noteref">701</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Regained its bed to sink again to rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than we were forth from out that needle’s eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when we free and in the open were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where the mountain backward piles itself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wearied out, and both of us uncertain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About our way, we stopped upon a plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More desolate than roads across the deserts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From where its margin borders on the void,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To foot of the high bank that ever rises,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A human body three times told would measure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And far as eye of mine could wing its flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now on the left, and on the right flank now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same this cornice did appear to me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereon our feet had not been moved as yet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I perceived the embankment round about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which all right of ascent had interdicted,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-702" id="noteref-702" epub:type="noteref">702</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be of marble white, and so adorned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sculptures, that not only Polycletus,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-703" id="noteref-703" epub:type="noteref">703</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Nature’s self, had there been put to shame.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-704" id="noteref-704" epub:type="noteref">704</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Angel, who came down to earth with tidings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of peace, that had been wept for many a year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And opened Heaven from its long interdict,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In front of us appeared so truthfully</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There sculptured in a gracious attitude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He did not seem an image that is silent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One would have sworn that he was saying, “Ave”;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-705" id="noteref-705" epub:type="noteref">705</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she was there in effigy portrayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who turned the key to ope the exalted love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in her mien this language had impressed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“<i xml:lang="la">Ecce ancilla Dei</i>,” as distinctly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-706" id="noteref-706" epub:type="noteref">706</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As any figure stamps itself in wax.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Keep not thy mind upon one place alone,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gentle Master said, who had me standing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon that side where people have their hearts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat I moved mine eyes, and I beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In rear of Mary, and upon that side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he was standing who conducted me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another story on the rock imposed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore I passed Virgilius and drew near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that before mine eyes it might be set.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There sculptured in the self-same marble were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cart and oxen, drawing the holy ark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore one dreads an office not appointed.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-707" id="noteref-707" epub:type="noteref">707</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>People appeared in front, and all of them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In seven choirs divided, of two senses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made one say, “No,” the other, “Yes, they sing.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Likewise unto the smoke of the frankincense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which there was imaged forth, the eyes and nose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were in the yes and no discordant made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Preceded there the vessel benedight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dancing with girded loins, the humble Psalmist,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-708" id="noteref-708" epub:type="noteref">708</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more and less than King was he in this.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Opposite, represented at the window</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a great palace, Michal looked upon him,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-709" id="noteref-709" epub:type="noteref">709</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as a woman scornful and afflicted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I moved my feet from where I had been standing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To examine near at hand another story,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which after Michal glimmered white upon me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There the high glory of the Roman Prince<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-710" id="noteref-710" epub:type="noteref">710</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was chronicled, whose great beneficence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Moved Gregory to his great victory;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-711" id="noteref-711" epub:type="noteref">711</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis of the Emperor Trajan I am speaking;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a poor widow at his bridle stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In attitude of weeping and of grief.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around about him seemed it thronged and full</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of cavaliers, and the eagles in the gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above them visibly in the wind were moving.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wretched woman in the midst of these</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemed to be saying: “Give me vengeance, Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For my dead son, for whom my heart is breaking.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to answer her: “Now wait until</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I shall return.” And she: “My Lord,” like one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whom grief is impatient, “shouldst thou not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Return?” And he: “Who shall be where I am</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will give it thee.” And she: “Good deed of others</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What boots it thee, if thou neglect thine own?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence he: “Now comfort thee, for it behoves me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I discharge my duty ere I move;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Justice so wills, and pity doth retain me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who on no new thing has ever looked</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was the creator of this visible language,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Novel to us, for here it is not found.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While I delighted me in contemplating</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The images of such humility,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dear to look on for their Maker’s sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Behold, upon this side, but rare they make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their steps,” the Poet murmured, “many people;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These will direct us to the lofty stairs.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine eyes, that in beholding were intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see new things, of which they curious are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In turning round towards him were not slow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still I wish not, Reader, thou shouldst swerve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From thy good purposes, because thou hearest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How God ordaineth that the debt be paid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attend not to the fashion of the torment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Think of what follows; think that at the worst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It cannot reach beyond the mighty sentence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Master,” began I, “that which I behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Moving towards us seems to me not persons,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And what I know not, so in sight I waver.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “The grievous quality</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this their torment bows them so to earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That my own eyes at first contended with it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But look there fixedly, and disentangle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By sight what cometh underneath those stones;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Already canst thou see how each is stricken.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O ye proud Christians! wretched, weary ones!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, in the vision of the mind infirm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Confidence have in your backsliding steps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do ye not comprehend that we are worms,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-712" id="noteref-712" epub:type="noteref">712</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Born to bring forth the angelic butterfly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That flieth unto judgment without screen?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why floats aloft your spirit high in air?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-713" id="noteref-713" epub:type="noteref">713</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like are ye unto insects undeveloped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as the worm in whom formation fails!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to sustain a ceiling or a roof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In place of corbel, oftentimes a figure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is seen to join its knees unto its breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which makes of the unreal real anguish</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arise in him who sees it; fashioned thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld I those, when I had ta’en good heed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>True is it, they were more or less bent down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">According as they more or less were laden;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he who had most patience in his looks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weeping did seem to say, “I can no more!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-11" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Omberto di Santafiore⁠—Oderisi d’ Agobbio⁠—Provenzan Salvani.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Our Father, thou who dwellest in the heavens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not circumscribed, but from the greater love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou bearest to the first effects on high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Praised be thy name and thine omnipotence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By every creature, as befitting is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To render thanks to thy sweet effluence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come unto us the peace of thy dominion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For unto it we cannot of ourselves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If it come not, with all our intellect.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as thine own Angels of their will</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make sacrifice to thee, Hosanna singing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So may all men make sacrifice of theirs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give unto us this day our daily manna,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten which in this rough wilderness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Backward goes he who toils most to advance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even as we the trespass we have suffered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pardon in one another, pardon thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Benignly, and regard not our desert.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our virtue, which is easily o’ercome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Put not to proof with the old Adversary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thou from him who spurs it so, deliver.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This last petition verily, dear Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not for ourselves is made, who need it not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for their sake who have remained behind us.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus for themselves and us good furtherance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those shades imploring, went beneath a weight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like unto that of which we sometimes dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unequally in anguish round and round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And weary all, upon that foremost cornice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Purging away the smoke-stains of the world.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If there good words are always said for us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What may not here be said and done for them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By those who have a good root to their will?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well may we help them wash away the marks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hence they carried, so that clean and light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They may ascend unto the starry wheels!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ah! so may pity and justice you disburden</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soon, that ye may have power to move the wing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shall uplift you after your desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Show us on which hand tow’rd the stairs the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is shortest, and if more than one the passes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Point us out that which least abruptly falls;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he who cometh with me, through the burden</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Adam’s flesh wherewith he is invested,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against his will is chary of his climbing.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The words of theirs which they returned to those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he whom I was following had spoken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was not manifest from whom they came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But it was said: “To the right hand come with us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the bank, and ye shall find a pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Possible for living person to ascend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And were I not impeded by the stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which this proud neck of mine doth subjugate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence I am forced to hold my visage down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him, who still lives and does not name himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would I regard, to see if I may know him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make him piteous unto this burden.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Latian was I, and born of a great Tuscan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Guglielmo Aldobrandeschi was my father;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I know not if his name were ever with you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ancient blood and deeds of gallantry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of my progenitors so arrogant made me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, thinking not upon the common mother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All men I held in scorn to such extent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I died therefor, as know the Sienese,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every child in Campagnatico.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am Omberto; and not to me alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has pride done harm, but all my kith and kin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has with it dragged into adversity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And here must I this burden bear for it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till God be satisfied, since I did not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among the living, here among the dead.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Listening I downward bent my countenance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And one of them, not this one who was speaking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twisted himself beneath the weight that cramps him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And looked at me, and knew me, and called out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Keeping his eyes laboriously fixed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On me, who all bowed down was going with them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O,” asked I him, “art thou not Oderisi,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Agobbio’s honor, and honor of that art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is in Paris called illuminating?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Brother,” said he, “more laughing are the leaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Touched by the brush of Franco Bolognese;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All his the honor now, and mine in part.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sooth I had not been so courteous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While I was living, for the great desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of excellence, on which my heart was bent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here of such pride is paid the forfeiture;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet I should not be here, were it not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, having power to sin, I turned to God.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O thou vain glory of the human powers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How little green upon thy summit lingers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If’t be not followed by an age of grossness!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In painting Cimabue thought that he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should hold the field, now Giotto has the cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the other’s fame is growing dim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So has one Guido from the other taken</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The glory of our tongue, and he perchance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is born, who from the nest shall chase them both.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Naught is this mundane rumor but a breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wind, that comes now this way and now that,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And changes name, because it changes side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What fame shalt thou have more, if old peel off</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From thee thy flesh, than if thou hadst been dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before thou left the <i xml:lang="">pappo</i> and the <i xml:lang="">dindi,</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere pass a thousand years? which is a shorter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Space to the eterne, than twinkling of an eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the circle that in heaven wheels slowest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With him, who takes so little of the road</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In front of me, all Tuscany resounded;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now he scarce is lisped of in Siena,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where he was lord, what time was overthrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Florentine delirium, that superb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was at that day as now ’tis prostitute.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your reputation is the color of grass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which comes and goes, and that discolors it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which it issues green from out the earth.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I: “Thy true speech fills my heart with good</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Humility, and great tumour thou assuagest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But who is he, of whom just now thou spakest?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“That,” he replied, “is Provenzan Salvani,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he is here because he had presumed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bring Siena all into his hands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has gone thus, and goeth without rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">E’er since he died; such money renders back</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In payment he who is on earth too daring.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I: “If every spirit who awaits</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The verge of life before that he repent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remains below there and ascends not hither,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Unless good orison shall him bestead,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until as much time as he lived be passed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How was the coming granted him in largess?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“When he in greatest splendour lived,” said he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Freely upon the Campo of Siena,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All shame being laid aside, he placed himself;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there to draw his friend from the duress</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in the prison-house of Charles he suffered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He brought himself to tremble in each vein.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say no more, and know that I speak darkly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet little time shall pass before thy neighbors</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will so demean themselves that thou canst gloss it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This action has released him from those confines.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-12" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Sculptures on the Pavement⁠—Ascent to the Second Circle.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Abreast, like oxen going in a yoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I with that heavy-laden soul went on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As long as the sweet pedagogue permitted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when he said, “Leave him, and onward pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For here ’tis good that with the sail and oars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As much as may be, each push on his barque;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upright, as walking wills it, I redressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My person, notwithstanding that my thoughts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remained within me downcast and abashed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had moved on, and followed willingly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The footsteps of my Master, and we both</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Already showed how light of foot we were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When unto me he said: “Cast down thine eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twere well for thee, to alleviate the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To look upon the bed beneath thy feet.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As, that some memory may exist of them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the buried dead their tombs in earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bear sculptured on them what they were before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence often there we weep for them afresh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From pricking of remembrance, which alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the compassionate doth set its spur;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So saw I there, but of a better semblance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In point of artifice, with figures covered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whate’er as pathway from the mount projects.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw that one who was created noble</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More than all other creatures, down from heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flaming with lightnings fall upon one side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw Briareus smitten by the dart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Celestial, lying on the other side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heavy upon the earth by mortal frost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw Thymbraeus, Pallas saw, and Mars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still clad in armour round about their father,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gaze at the scattered members of the giants.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw, at foot of his great labor, Nimrod,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if bewildered, looking at the people</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who had been proud with him in Sennaar.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Niobe! with what afflicted eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thee I beheld upon the pathway traced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Between thy seven and seven children slain!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Saul! how fallen upon thy proper sword</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Didst thou appear there lifeless in Gilboa,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That felt thereafter neither rain nor dew!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O mad Arachne! so I thee beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">E’en then half spider, sad upon the shreds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of fabric wrought in evil hour for thee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Rehoboam! no more seems to threaten</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thine image there; but full of consternation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A chariot bears it off, when none pursues!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Displayed moreo’er the adamantine pavement</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How unto his own mother made Alcmaeon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Costly appear the luckless ornament;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Displayed how his own sons did throw themselves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon Sennacherib within the temple,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how, he being dead, they left him there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Displayed the ruin and the cruel carnage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Tomyris wrought, when she to Cyrus said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Blood didst thou thirst for, and with blood I glut thee!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Displayed how routed fled the Assyrians</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After that Holofernes had been slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And likewise the remainder of that slaughter.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw there Troy in ashes and in caverns;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O Ilion! thee, how abject and debased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Displayed the image that is there discerned!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whoe’er of pencil master was or stile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That could portray the shades and traits which there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would cause each subtle genius to admire?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dead seemed the dead, the living seemed alive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Better than I saw not who saw the truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that I trod upon while bowed I went.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now wax ye proud, and on with looks uplifted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye sons of Eve, and bow not down your faces</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that ye may behold your evil ways!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More of the mount by us was now encompassed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And far more spent the circuit of the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than had the mind preoccupied imagined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he, who ever watchful in advance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was going on, began: “Lift up thy head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis no more time to go thus meditating.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo there an Angel who is making haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To come towards us; lo, returning is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From service of the day the sixth handmaiden.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With reverence thine acts and looks adorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that he may delight to speed us upward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Think that this day will never dawn again.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was familiar with his admonition</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ever to lose no time; so on this theme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He could not unto me speak covertly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards us came the being beautiful</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vested in white, and in his countenance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as appears the tremulous morning star.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His arms he opened, and opened then his wings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Come,” said he, “near at hand here are the steps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And easy from henceforth is the ascent.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At this announcement few are they who come!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O human creatures, born to soar aloft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why fall ye thus before a little wind?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He led us on to where the rock was cleft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There smote upon my forehead with his wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then a safe passage promised unto me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As on the right hand, to ascend the mount</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where seated is the church that lordeth it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’er the well-guided, above Rubaconte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bold abruptness of the ascent is broken</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By stairways that were made there in the age</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When still were safe the ledger and the stave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’en thus attempered is the bank which falls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sheer downward from the second circle there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But on this, side and that the high rock graze.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As we were turning thitherward our persons,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Beati pauperes spiritu,” voices</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sang in such wise that speech could tell it not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah me! how different are these entrances</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the Infernal! for with anthems here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One enters, and below with wild laments.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We now were hunting up the sacred stairs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And it appeared to me by far more easy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than on the plain it had appeared before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence I: “My Master, say, what heavy thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has been uplifted from me, so that hardly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aught of fatigue is felt by me in walking?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He answered: “When the P’s which have remained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still on thy face almost obliterate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall wholly, as the first is, be erased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy feet will be so vanquished by good will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That not alone they shall not feel fatigue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But urging up will be to them delight.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then did I even as they do who are going</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With something on the head to them unknown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unless the signs of others make them doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore the hand to ascertain is helpful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seeks and finds, and doth fulfill the office</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which cannot be accomplished by the sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with the fingers of the right hand spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I found but six the letters, that had carved</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon my temples he who bore the keys;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon beholding which my Leader smiled.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-13" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Second Circle⁠—The Envious⁠—Sapia of Siena.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>We were upon the summit of the stairs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where for the second time is cut away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mountain, which ascending shriveth all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There in like manner doth a cornice bind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hill all round about, as does the first,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save that its arc more suddenly is curved.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shade is there none, nor sculpture that appears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So seems the bank, and so the road seems smooth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With but the livid color of the stone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If to inquire we wait for people here,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Poet said, “I fear that peradventure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too much delay will our election have.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then steadfast on the sun his eyes he fixed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made his right side the centre of his motion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turned the left part of himself about.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O thou sweet light! with trust in whom I enter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon this novel journey, do thou lead us,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said he, “as one within here should be led.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou warmest the world, thou shinest over it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If other reason prompt not otherwise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy rays should evermore our leaders be!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As much as here is counted for a mile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much already there had we advanced</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In little time, by dint of ready will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tow’rds us there were heard to fly, albeit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They were not visible, spirits uttering</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto Love’s table courteous invitations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first voice that passed onward in its flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Vinum non habent,” said in accents loud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And went reiterating it behind us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ere it wholly grew inaudible</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because of distance, passed another, crying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“I am Orestes!” and it also stayed not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O,” said I, “Father, these, what voices are they?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And even as I asked, behold the third,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying: “Love those from whom ye have had evil!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the good Master said: “This circle scourges</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sin of envy, and on that account</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are drawn from love the lashes of the scourge.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bridle of another sound shall be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I think that thou wilt hear it, as I judge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before thou comest to the Pass of Pardon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But fix thine eyes athwart the air right steadfast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And people thou wilt see before us sitting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each one close against the cliff is seated.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then wider than at first mine eyes I opened;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I looked before me, and saw shades with mantles</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not from the color of the stone diverse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when we were a little farther onward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I heard a cry of, “Mary, pray for us!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A cry of, “Michael, Peter, and all Saints!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I do not think there walketh still on earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A man so hard, that he would not be pierced</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With pity at what afterward I saw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For when I had approached so near to them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That manifest to me their acts became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drained was I at the eyes by heavy grief.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Covered with sackcloth vile they seemed to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And one sustained the other with his shoulder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all of them were by the bank sustained.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus do the blind, in want of livelihood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stand at the doors of churches asking alms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And one upon another leans his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that in others pity soon may rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not only at the accent of their words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But at their aspect, which no less implores.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as unto the blind the sun comes not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So to the shades, of whom just now I spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heaven’s light will not be bounteous of itself;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all their lids an iron wire transpierces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sews them up, as to a sparhawk wild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is done, because it will not quiet stay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me it seemed, in passing, to do outrage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing the others without being seen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore I turned me to my counsel sage.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well knew he what the mute one wished to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therefore waited not for my demand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But said: “Speak, and be brief, and to the point.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had Virgilius upon that side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the embankment from which one may fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since by no border ’tis engarlanded;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the other side of me I had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The shades devout, who through the horrible seam</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pressed out the tears so that they bathed their cheeks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To them I turned me, and, “O people, certain,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began I, “of beholding the high light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which your desire has solely in its care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So may grace speedily dissolve the scum</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon your consciences, that limpidly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through them descend the river of the mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me, for dear ’twill be to me and gracious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If any soul among you here is Latian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ’twill perchance be good for him I learn it.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O brother mine, each one is citizen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of one true city; but thy meaning is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who may have lived in Italy a pilgrim.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By way of answer this I seemed to hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little farther on than where I stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat I made myself still nearer heard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the rest I saw a shade that waited</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In aspect, and should anyone ask how,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its chin it lifted upward like a blind man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Spirit,” I said, “who stoopest to ascend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thou art he who did reply to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make thyself known to me by place or name.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Sienese was I,” it replied, “and with</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The others here recleanse my guilty life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weeping to Him to lend himself to us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sapient I was not, although I Sapia</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was called, and I was at another’s harm</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More happy far than at my own good fortune.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that thou mayst not think that I deceive thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hear if I was as foolish as I tell thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The arc already of my years descending,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My fellow-citizens near unto Colle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were joined in battle with their adversaries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I was praying God for what he willed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Routed were they, and turned into the bitter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Passes of flight; and I, the chase beholding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A joy received unequalled by all others;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that I lifted upward my bold face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crying to God, ‘Henceforth I fear thee not,’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As did the blackbird at the little sunshine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peace I desired with God at the extreme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of my existence, and as yet would not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My debt have been by penitence discharged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had it not been that in remembrance held me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pier Pettignano in his holy prayers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who out of charity was grieved for me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But who art thou, that into our conditions</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Questioning goest, and hast thine eyes unbound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I believe, and breathing dost discourse?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Mine eyes,” I said, “will yet be here ta’en from me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for short space; for small is the offence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Committed by their being turned with envy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far greater is the fear, wherein suspended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My soul is, of the torment underneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For even now the load down there weighs on me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she to me: “Who led thee, then, among us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up here, if to return below thou thinkest?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I: “He who is with me, and speaks not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And living am I; therefore ask of me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spirit elect, if thou wouldst have me move</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’er yonder yet my mortal feet for thee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O, this is such a novel thing to hear,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She answered, “that great sign it is God loves thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore with prayer of thine sometimes assist me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I implore, by what thou most desirest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If e’er thou treadest the soil of Tuscany,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well with my kindred reinstate my fame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them wilt thou see among that people vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who hope in Talamone, and will lose there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More hope than in discovering the Diana;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there still more the admirals will lose.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-14" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Guido del Duca and Renier da Calboli.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Who is this one that goes about our mountain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ever Death has given him power of flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And opes his eyes and shuts them at his will?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I know not who, but know he’s not alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ask him thyself, for thou art nearer to him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gently, so that he may speak, accost him.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus did two spirits, leaning tow’rds each other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Discourse about me there on the right hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then held supine their faces to address me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said the one: “O soul, that, fastened still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within the body, tow’rds the heaven art going,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For charity console us, and declare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence comest and who art thou; for thou mak’st us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As much to marvel at this grace of thine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As must a thing that never yet has been.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I: “Through midst of Tuscany there wanders</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A streamlet that is born in Falterona,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And not a hundred miles of course suffice it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thereupon do I this body bring.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell you who I am were speech in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because my name as yet makes no great noise.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If well thy meaning I can penetrate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With intellect of mine,” then answered me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He who first spake, “thou speakest of the Arno.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said the other to him: “Why concealed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This one the appellation of that river,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as a man doth of things horrible?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus the shade that questioned was of this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himself acquitted: “I know not; but truly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis fit the name of such a valley perish;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For from its fountainhead (where is so pregnant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Alpine mountain whence is cleft Peloro</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in few places it that mark surpasses)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To where it yields itself in restoration</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of what the heaven doth of the sea dry up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence have the rivers that which goes with them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Virtue is like an enemy avoided</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By all, as is a serpent, through misfortune</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of place, or through bad habit that impels them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On which account have so transformed their nature</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dwellers in that miserable valley,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It seems that Circe had them in her pasture.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mid ugly swine, of acorns worthier</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than other food for human use created,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It first directeth its impoverished way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Curs findeth it thereafter, coming downward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More snarling than their puissance demands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turns from them disdainfully its muzzle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It goes on falling, and the more it grows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more it finds the dogs becoming wolves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This maledict and misadventurous ditch.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Descended then through many a hollow gulf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It finds the foxes so replete with fraud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They fear no cunning that may master them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor will I cease because another hears me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And well ’twill be for him, if still he mind him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of what a truthful spirit to me unravels.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy grandson I behold, who doth become</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A hunter of those wolves upon the bank</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the wild stream, and terrifies them all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sells their flesh, it being yet alive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereafter slaughters them like ancient beeves;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Many of life, himself of praise, deprives.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bloodstained he issues from the dismal forest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He leaves it such, a thousand years from now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In its primeval state ’tis not re-wooded.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As at the announcement of impending ills</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The face of him who listens is disturbed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whate’er side the peril seize upon him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So I beheld that other soul, which stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turned round to listen, grow disturbed and sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When it had gathered to itself the word.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The speech of one and aspect of the other</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had me desirous made to know their names,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And question mixed with prayers I made thereof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat the spirit which first spake to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began again: “Thou wishest I should bring me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To do for thee what thou’lt not do for me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But since God willeth that in thee shine forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such grace of his, I’ll not be chary with thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Know, then, that I Guido del Duca am.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My blood was so with envy set on fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That if I had beheld a man make merry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou wouldst have seen me sprinkled o’er with pallor.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From my own sowing such the straw I reap!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O human race! why dost thou set thy heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where interdict of partnership must be?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is Renier; this is the boast and honor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the house of Calboli, where no one since</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has made himself the heir of his desert.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not alone his blood is made devoid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twixt Po and mount, and seashore and the Reno,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of good required for truth and for diversion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all within these boundaries is full</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of venomous roots, so that too tardily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By cultivation now would they diminish.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where is good Lizio, and Arrigo Manardi,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pier Traversaro, and Guido di Carpigna,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O Romagnuoli into bastards turned?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When in Bologna will a Fabbro rise?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When in Faenza a Bernardin di Fosco,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noble scion of ignoble seed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be not astonished, Tuscan, if I weep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I remember, with Guido da Prata,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ugolin d’ Azzo, who was living with us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frederick Tignoso and his company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The house of Traversara, and th’ Anastagi,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And one race and the other is extinct;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dames and cavaliers, the toils and ease</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That filled our souls with love and courtesy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where the hearts have so malicious grown!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Brettinoro! why dost thou not flee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing that all thy family is gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many people, not to be corrupted?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bagnacaval does well in not begetting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ill does Castrocaro, and Conio worse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In taking trouble to beget such Counts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will do well the Pagani, when their Devil</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall have departed; but not therefore pure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will testimony of them e’er remain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Ugolin de’ Fantoli, secure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy name is, since no longer is awaited</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One who, degenerating, can obscure it!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But go now, Tuscan, for it now delights me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weep far better than it does to speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much has our discourse my mind distressed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We were aware that those beloved souls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heard us depart; therefore, by keeping silent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They made us of our pathway confident.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we became alone by going onward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thunder, when it doth cleave the air, appeared</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A voice, that counter to us came, exclaiming:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Shall slay me whosoever findeth me!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fled as the reverberation dies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If suddenly the cloud asunder bursts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as hearing had a truce from this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behold another, with so great a crash,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it resembled thunderings following fast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I am Aglaurus, who became a stone!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then, to press myself close to the Poet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I backward, and not forward, took a step.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already on all sides the air was quiet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said he to me: “That was the hard curb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ought to hold a man within his bounds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But you take in the bait so that the hook</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the old Adversary draws you to him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hence availeth little curb or call.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heavens are calling you, and wheel around you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Displaying to you their eternal beauties,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And still your eye is looking on the ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence He, who all discerns, chastises you.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-15" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Third Circle⁠—The Irascible.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As much as ’twixt the close of the third hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dawn of day appeareth of that sphere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which aye in fashion of a child is playing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much it now appeared, towards the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was of his course remaining to the sun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There it was evening, and ’twas midnight here;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the rays smote the middle of our faces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because by us the mount was so encircled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That straight towards the west we now were going</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I perceived my forehead overpowered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath the splendour far more than at first,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stupor were to me the things unknown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat towards the summit of my brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I raised my hands, and made myself the visor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which the excessive glare diminishes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when from off the water, or a mirror,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sunbeam leaps unto the opposite side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ascending upward in the selfsame measure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it descends, and deviates as far</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From falling of a stone in line direct,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(As demonstrate experiment and art,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So it appeared to me that by a light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Refracted there before me I was smitten;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which account my sight was swift to flee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What is that, Father sweet, from which I cannot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fully screen my sight that it avail me,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said I, “and seems towards us to be moving?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Marvel thou not, if dazzle thee as yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The family of heaven,” he answered me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“An angel ’tis, who comes to invite us upward.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon will it be, that to behold these things</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall not be grievous, but delightful to thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As much as nature fashioned thee to feel.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we had reached the Angel benedight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With joyful voice he said: “Here enter in</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stairway far less steep than are the others.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We mounting were, already thence departed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And “Beati misericordes” was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behind us sung, “Rejoice, thou that o’ercomest!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Master and myself, we two alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were going upward, and I thought, in going,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some profit to acquire from words of his;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I to him directed me, thus asking:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“What did the spirit of Romagna mean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mentioning interdict and partnership?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence he to me: “Of his own greatest failing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He knows the harm; and therefore wonder not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If he reprove us, that we less may rue it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because are thither pointed your desires</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where by companionship each share is lessened,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Envy doth ply the bellows to your sighs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if the love of the supernal sphere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should upwardly direct your aspiration,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There would not be that fear within your breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For there, as much the more as one says ‘Our,’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much the more of good each one possesses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more of charity in that cloister burns.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I am more hungering to be satisfied,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I said, “than if I had before been silent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more of doubt within my mind I gather.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How can it be, that boon distributed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more possessors can more wealthy make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein, than if by few it be possessed?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “Because thou fixest still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy mind entirely upon earthly things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou pluckest darkness from the very light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That goodness infinite and ineffable</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is above there, runneth unto love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As to a lucid body comes the sunbeam.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much it gives itself as it finds ardour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that as far as charity extends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’er it increases the eternal valor.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the more people thitherward aspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More are there to love well, and more they love there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, as a mirror, one reflects the other.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if my reasoning appease thee not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou shalt see Beatrice; and she will fully</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Take from thee this and every other longing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endeavour, then, that soon may be extinct,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As are the two already, the five wounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That close themselves again by being painful.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as I wished to say, “Thou dost appease me,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw that I had reached another circle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that my eager eyes made me keep silence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There it appeared to me that in a vision</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ecstatic on a sudden I was rapt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in a temple many persons saw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the door a woman, with the sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behaviour of a mother, saying: “Son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why in this manner hast thou dealt with us?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, sorrowing, thy father and myself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were seeking for thee;”⁠—and as here she ceased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That which appeared at first had disappeared.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then I beheld another with those waters</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adown her cheeks which grief distils whenever</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From great disdain of others it is born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saying: “If of that city thou art lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For whose name was such strife among the gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whence doth every science scintillate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Avenge thyself on those audacious arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That clasped our daughter, O Pisistratus;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the lord seemed to me benign and mild</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To answer her with aspect temperate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“What shall we do to those who wish us ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If he who loves us be by us condemned?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then saw I people hot in fire of wrath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With stones a young man slaying, clamorously</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still crying to each other, “Kill him! kill him!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him I saw bow down, because of death</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That weighed already on him, to the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of his eyes made ever gates to heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imploring the high Lord, in so great strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he would pardon those his persecutors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such an aspect as unlocks compassion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon as my soul had outwardly returned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To things external to it which are true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did I my not false errors recognize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Leader, who could see me bear myself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to a man that rouses him from sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exclaimed: “What ails thee, that thou canst not stand?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But hast been coming more than half a league</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Veiling thine eyes, and with thy legs entangled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In guise of one whom wine or sleep subdues?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O my sweet Father, if thou listen to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’ll tell thee,” said I, “what appeared to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When thus from me my legs were ta’en away.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he: “If thou shouldst have a hundred masks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon thy face, from me would not be shut</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy cogitations, howsoever small.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What thou hast seen was that thou mayst not fail</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To ope thy heart unto the waters of peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which from the eternal fountain are diffused.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I did not ask, ‘What ails thee?’ as he does</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who only looketh with the eyes that see not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When of the soul bereft the body lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But asked it to give vigour to thy feet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus must we needs urge on the sluggards, slow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To use their wakefulness when it returns.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We passed along, athwart the twilight peering</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forward as far as ever eye could stretch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the sunbeams serotine and lucent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo! by slow degrees a smoke approached</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In our direction, sombre as the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor was there place to hide one’s self therefrom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This of our eyes and the pure air bereft us.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-16" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Marco Lombardo.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Darkness of hell, and of a night deprived</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of every planet under a poor sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As much as may be tenebrous with cloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne’er made unto my sight so thick a veil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As did that smoke which there enveloped us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor to the feeling of so rough a texture;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For not an eye it suffered to stay open;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat mine escort, faithful and sagacious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drew near to me and offered me his shoulder.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’en as a blind man goes behind his guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lest he should wander, or should strike against</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aught that may harm or peradventure kill him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So went I through the bitter and foul air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Listening unto my Leader, who said only,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Look that from me thou be not separated.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Voices I heard, and everyone appeared</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To supplicate for peace and misericord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Lamb of God who takes away our sins.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still “Agnus Dei” their exordium was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One word there was in all, and metre one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that all harmony appeared among them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Master,” I said, “are spirits those I hear?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he to me: “Thou apprehendest truly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they the knot of anger go unloosing.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now who art thou, that cleavest through our smoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And art discoursing of us even as though</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou didst by calends still divide the time?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After this manner by a voice was spoken;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereon my Master said: “Do thou reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ask if on this side the way go upward.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I: “O creature that dost cleanse thyself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To return beautiful to Him who made thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou shalt hear marvels if thou follow me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thee will I follow far as is allowed me,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He answered; “and if smoke prevent our seeing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hearing shall keep us joined instead thereof.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereon began I: “With that swathing band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which death unwindeth am I going upward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hither came I through the infernal anguish.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if God in his grace has me infolded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that he wills that I behold his court</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By method wholly out of modern usage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conceal not from me who ere death thou wast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But tell it me, and tell me if I go</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right for the pass, and be thy words our escort.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Lombard was I, and I was Marco called;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The world I knew, and loved that excellence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At which has each one now unbent his bow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For mounting upward, thou art going right.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus he made answer, and subjoined: “I pray thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To pray for me when thou shalt be above.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I to him: “My faith I pledge to thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To do what thou dost ask me; but am bursting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Inly with doubt, unless I rid me of it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First it was simple, and is now made double</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By thy opinion, which makes certain to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here and elsewhere, that which I couple with it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The world forsooth is utterly deserted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By every virtue, as thou tellest me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with iniquity is big and covered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I beseech thee point me out the cause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I may see it, and to others show it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For one in the heavens, and here below one puts it.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sigh profound, that grief forced into Ai!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He first sent forth, and then began he: “Brother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The world is blind, and sooth thou comest from it!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye who are living every cause refer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still upward to the heavens, as if all things</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They of necessity moved with themselves.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If this were so, in you would be destroyed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Free will, nor any justice would there be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In having joy for good, or grief for evil.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heavens your movements do initiate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I say not all; but granting that I say it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Light has been given you for good and evil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And free volition; which, if some fatigue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the first battles with the heavens it suffers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Afterwards conquers all, if well ’tis nurtured.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To greater force and to a better nature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though free, ye subject are, and that creates</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mind in you the heavens have not in charge.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence, if the present world doth go astray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In you the cause is, be it sought in you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I therein will now be thy true spy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth from the hand of Him, who fondles it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before it is, like to a little girl</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weeping and laughing in her childish sport,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Issues the simple soul, that nothing knows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save that, proceeding from a joyous Maker,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gladly it turns to that which gives it pleasure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of trivial good at first it tastes the savour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is cheated by it, and runs after it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If guide or rein turn not aside its love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence it behoved laws for a rein to place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behoved a king to have, who at the least</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the true city should discern the tower.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The laws exist, but who sets hand to them?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No one; because the shepherd who precedes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can ruminate, but cleaveth not the hoof;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore the people that perceives its guide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strike only at the good for which it hankers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feeds upon that, and farther seeketh not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clearly canst thou perceive that evil guidance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cause is that has made the world depraved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And not that nature is corrupt in you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rome, that reformed the world, accustomed was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two suns to have, which one road and the other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of God and of the world, made manifest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One has the other quenched, and to the crosier</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sword is joined, and ill beseemeth it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That by main force one with the other go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because, being joined, one feareth not the other;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thou believe not, think upon the grain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For by its seed each herb is recognized.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the land laved by Po and Adige,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Valor and courtesy used to be found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before that Frederick had his controversy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now in security can pass that way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whoever will abstain, through sense of shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From speaking with the good, or drawing near them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>True, three old men are left, in whom upbraids</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ancient age the new, and late they deem it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That God restore them to the better life:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Currado da Palazzo, and good Gherardo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Guido da Castel, who better named is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In fashion of the French, the simple Lombard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say thou henceforward that the Church of Rome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Confounding in itself two governments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Falls in the mire, and soils itself and burden.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O Marco mine,” I said, “thou reasonest well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now discern I why the sons of Levi</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have been excluded from the heritage.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what Gherardo is it, who, as sample</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a lost race, thou sayest has remained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In reprobation of the barbarous age?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Either thy speech deceives me, or it tempts me,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He answered me; “for speaking Tuscan to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It seems of good Gherardo naught thou knowest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By other surname do I know him not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unless I take it from his daughter Gaia.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May God be with you, for I come no farther.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold the dawn, that through the smoke rays out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Already whitening; and I must depart⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yonder the Angel is⁠—ere he appear.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus did he speak, and would no farther hear me.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-17" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Dante’s Dream of Anger⁠—The Fourth Circle⁠—The Slothful.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Remember, Reader, if e’er in the Alps</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A mist o’ertook thee, through which thou couldst see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not otherwise than through its membrane mole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How, when the vapors humid and condensed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Begin to dissipate themselves, the sphere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the sun feebly enters in among them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy imagination will be swift</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In coming to perceive how I re-saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sun at first, that was already setting.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus, to the faithful footsteps of my Master</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mating mine own, I issued from that cloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rays already dead on the low shores.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O thou, Imagination, that dost steal us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So from without sometimes, that man perceives not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Although around may sound a thousand trumpets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who moveth thee, if sense impel thee not?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Moves thee a light, which in the heaven takes form,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By self, or by a will that downward guides it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of her impiety, who changed her form</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the bird that most delights in singing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In my imagining appeared the trace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hereupon my mind was so withdrawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within itself, that from without there came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nothing that then might be received by it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then reigned within my lofty fantasy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One crucified, disdainful and ferocious</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In countenance, and even thus was dying.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around him were the great Ahasuerus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Esther his wife, and the just Mordecai,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who was in word and action so entire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even as this image burst asunder</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of its own self, in fashion of a bubble</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the water it was made of fails,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There rose up in my vision a young maiden</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bitterly weeping, and she said: “O queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why hast thou wished in anger to be naught?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou’st slain thyself, Lavinia not to lose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now hast thou lost me; I am she who mourns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mother, at thine ere at another’s ruin.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As sleep is broken, when upon a sudden</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">New light strikes in upon the eyelids closed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And broken quivers ere it dieth wholly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So this imagining of mine fell down</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As soon as the effulgence smote my face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Greater by far than what is in our wont.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I turned me round to see where I might be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When said a voice, “Here is the passage up;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which from all other purposes removed me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made my wish so full of eagerness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To look and see who was it that was speaking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It never rests till meeting face to face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as before the sun, which quells the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in its own excess its figure veils,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even so my power was insufficient here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“This is a spirit divine, who in the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of going up directs us without asking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And who with his own light himself conceals.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He does with us as man doth with himself;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he who sees the need, and waits the asking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Malignly leans already tow’rds denial.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Accord we now our feet to such inviting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let us make haste to mount ere it grow dark;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For then we could not till the day return.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus my Conductor said; and I and he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Together turned our footsteps to a stairway;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I, as soon as the first step I reached,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Near me perceived a motion as of wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fanning in the face, and saying, “<i xml:lang="">Beati</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i xml:lang="">Pacifici</i>, who are without ill anger.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already over us were so uplifted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The latest sunbeams, which the night pursues,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That upon many sides the stars appeared.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O manhood mine, why dost thou vanish so?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I said within myself; for I perceived</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The vigour of my legs was put in truce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We at the point were where no more ascends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The stairway upward, and were motionless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as a ship, which at the shore arrives;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I gave heed a little, if I might hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aught whatsoever in the circle new;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then to my Master turned me round and said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Say, my sweet Father, what delinquency</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is purged here in the circle where we are?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Although our feet may pause, pause not thy speech.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “The love of good, remiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In what it should have done, is here restored;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here plied again the ill-belated oar;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still more openly to understand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turn unto me thy mind, and thou shalt gather</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some profitable fruit from our delay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neither Creator nor a creature ever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Son,” he began, “was destitute of love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Natural or spiritual; and thou knowest it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The natural was ever without error;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But err the other may by evil object,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or by too much, or by too little vigour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While in the first it well directed is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the second moderates itself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It cannot be the cause of sinful pleasure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when to ill it turns, and, with more care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or lesser than it ought, runs after good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Gainst the Creator works his own creation.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence thou mayst comprehend that love must be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The seed within yourselves of every virtue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every act that merits punishment.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now inasmuch as never from the welfare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of its own subject can love turn its sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From their own hatred all things are secure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And since we cannot think of any being</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Standing alone, nor from the First divided,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of hating Him is all desire cut off.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence if, discriminating, I judge well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The evil that one loves is of one’s neighbor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this is born in three modes in your clay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There are, who, by abasement of their neighbor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hope to excel, and therefore only long</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from his greatness he may be cast down;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There are, who power, grace, honor, and renown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fear they may lose because another rises,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence are so sad that the reverse they love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there are those whom injury seems to chafe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that it makes them greedy for revenge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And such must needs shape out another’s harm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This threefold love is wept for down below;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now of the other will I have thee hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That runneth after good with measure faulty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each one confusedly a good conceives</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein the mind may rest, and longeth for it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore to overtake it each one strives.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If languid love to look on this attract you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or in attaining unto it, this cornice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After just penitence, torments you for it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s other good that does not make man happy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis not felicity, ’tis not the good</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Essence, of every good the fruit and root.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The love that yields itself too much to this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above us is lamented in three circles;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But how tripartite it may be described,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say not, that thou seek it for thyself.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-18" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Virgil’s Discourse of Love⁠—The Abbot of San Zeno.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>An end had put unto his reasoning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lofty Teacher, and attent was looking</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into my face, if I appeared content;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, whom a new thirst still goaded on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without was mute, and said within: “Perchance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The too much questioning I make annoys him.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that true Father, who had comprehended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The timid wish, that opened not itself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By speaking gave me hardihood to speak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence I: “My sight is, Master, vivified</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So in thy light, that clearly I discern</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whate’er thy speech importeth or describes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore I thee entreat, sweet Father dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To teach me love, to which thou dost refer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Every good action and its contrary.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Direct,” he said, “towards me the keen eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of intellect, and clear will be to thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The error of the blind, who would be leaders.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soul, which is created apt to love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is mobile unto everything that pleases,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soon as by pleasure she is waked to action.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your apprehension from some real thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An image draws, and in yourselves displays it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that it makes the soul turn unto it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if, when turned, towards it she incline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love is that inclination; it is nature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is by pleasure bound in you anew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then even as the fire doth upward move</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By its own form, which to ascend is born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where longest in its matter it endures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So comes the captive soul into desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is a motion spiritual, and ne’er rests</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until she doth enjoy the thing beloved.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now may apparent be to thee how hidden</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The truth is from those people, who aver</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All love is in itself a laudable thing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because its matter may perchance appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aye to be good; but yet not each impression</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is good, albeit good may be the wax.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thy words, and my sequacious intellect,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I answered him, “have love revealed to me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that has made me more impregned with doubt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For if love from without be offered us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with another foot the soul go not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If right or wrong she go, ’tis not her merit.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “What reason seeth here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Myself can tell thee; beyond that await</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Beatrice, since ’tis a work of faith.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Every substantial form, that segregate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From matter is, and with it is united,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Specific power has in itself collected,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which without act is not perceptible,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor shows itself except by its effect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As life does in a plant by the green leaves.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still, whence cometh the intelligence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the first notions, man is ignorant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the affection for the first allurements,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which are in you as instinct in the bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make its honey; and this first desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Merit of praise or blame containeth not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, that to this all others may be gathered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Innate within you is the power that counsels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And it should keep the threshold of assent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is the principle, from which is taken</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Occasion of desert in you, according</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As good and guilty loves it takes and winnows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those who, in reasoning, to the bottom went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were of this innate liberty aware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore bequeathed they Ethics to the world.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Supposing, then, that from necessity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Springs every love that is within you kindled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within yourselves the power is to restrain it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The noble virtue Beatrice understands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the free will; and therefore see that thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bear it in mind, if she should speak of it.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The moon, belated almost unto midnight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now made the stars appear to us more rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Formed like a bucket, that is all ablaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And counter to the heavens ran through those paths</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which the sun sets aflame, when he of Rome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sees it ’twixt Sardes and Corsicans go down;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that patrician shade, for whom is named</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pietola more than any Mantuan town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had laid aside the burden of my lading;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence I, who reason manifest and plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In answer to my questions had received,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stood like a man in drowsy reverie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But taken from me was this drowsiness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suddenly by a people, that behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our backs already had come round to us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as, of old, Ismenus and Asopus</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beside them saw at night the rush and throng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If but the Thebans were in need of Bacchus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So they along that circle curve their step,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From what I saw of those approaching us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who by goodwill and righteous love are ridden.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full soon they were upon us, because running</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Moved onward all that mighty multitude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And two in the advance cried out, lamenting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Mary in haste unto the mountain ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Caesar, that he might subdue Ilerda,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrust at Marseilles, and then ran into Spain.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Quick! quick! so that the time may not be lost</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By little love!” forthwith the others cried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“For ardour in well-doing freshens grace!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O folk, in whom an eager fervour now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Supplies perhaps delay and negligence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Put by you in well-doing, through lukewarmness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This one who lives, and truly I lie not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would fain go up, if but the sun relight us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So tell us where the passage nearest is.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These were the words of him who was my Guide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And someone of those spirits said: “Come on</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behind us, and the opening shalt thou find;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So full of longing are we to move onward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That stay we cannot; therefore pardon us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thou for churlishness our justice take.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was San Zeno’s Abbot at Verona,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the empire of good Barbarossa,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom still sorrowing Milan holds discourse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he has one foot in the grave already,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who shall erelong lament that monastery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sorry be of having there had power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because his son, in his whole body sick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And worse in mind, and who was evil-born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He put into the place of its true pastor.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If more he said, or silent was, I know not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had already passed so far beyond us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But this I heard, and to retain it pleased me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he who was in every need my succor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said: “Turn thee hitherward; see two of them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come fastening upon slothfulness their teeth.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In rear of all they shouted: “Sooner were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The people dead to whom the sea was opened,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than their inheritors the Jordan saw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And those who the fatigue did not endure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the issue, with Anchises’ son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Themselves to life withouten glory offered.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then when from us so separated were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those shades, that they no longer could be seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within me a new thought did entrance find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence others many and diverse were born;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so I lapsed from one into another,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in a reverie mine eyes I closed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And meditation into dream transmuted.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-19" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Dante’s Dream of the Siren⁠—The Fifth Circle⁠—The Avaricious and Prodigal⁠—Pope Adrian <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It was the hour when the diurnal heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No more can warm the coldness of the moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vanquished by earth, or peradventure Saturn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When geomancers their Fortuna Major</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">See in the orient before the dawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rise by a path that long remains not dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There came to me in dreams a stammering woman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Squint in her eyes, and in her feet distorted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hands dissevered and of sallow hue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I looked at her; and as the sun restores</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The frigid members which the night benumbs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even thus my gaze did render voluble</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her tongue, and made her all erect thereafter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In little while, and the lost countenance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As love desires it so in her did color.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When in this wise she had her speech unloosed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She ’gan to sing so, that with difficulty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could I have turned my thoughts away from her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I am,” she sang, “I am the Siren sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who mariners amid the main unman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So full am I of pleasantness to hear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I drew Ulysses from his wandering way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto my song, and he who dwells with me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seldom departs so wholly I content him.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her mouth was not yet closed again, before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Appeared a Lady saintly and alert</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Close at my side to put her to confusion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Virgilius, O Virgilius! who is this?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sternly she said; and he was drawing near</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With eyes still fixed upon that modest one.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She seized the other and in front laid open,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rending her garments, and her belly showed me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This waked me with the stench that issued from it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I turned mine eyes, and good Virgilius said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“At least thrice have I called thee; rise and come;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Find we the opening by which thou mayst enter.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I rose; and full already of high day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were all the circles of the Sacred Mountain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the new sun at our back we went.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Following behind him, I my forehead bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like unto one who has it laden with thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who makes himself the half arch of a bridge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I heard say, “Come, here the passage is,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spoken in a manner gentle and benign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as we hear not in this mortal region.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With open wings, which of a swan appeared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upward he turned us who thus spake to us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Between the two walls of the solid granite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He moved his pinions afterwards and fanned us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Affirming those <i xml:lang="">qui lugent</i> to be blessed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they shall have their souls with comfort filled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What aileth thee, that aye to earth thou gazest?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To me my Guide began to say, we both</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Somewhat beyond the Angel having mounted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I: “With such misgiving makes me go</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A vision new, which bends me to itself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that I cannot from the thought withdraw me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Didst thou behold,” he said, “that old enchantress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who sole above us henceforth is lamented?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Didst thou behold how man is freed from her?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suffice it thee, and smite earth with thy heels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thine eyes lift upward to the lure, that whirls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Eternal King with revolutions vast.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as the hawk, that first his feet surveys,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then turns him to the call and stretches forward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the desire of food that draws him thither,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such I became, and such, as far as cleaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rock to give a way to him who mounts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Went on to where the circling doth begin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the fifth circle when I had come forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">People I saw upon it who were weeping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stretched prone upon the ground, all downward turned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Adhaesit pavimento anima mea,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I heard them say with sighings so profound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hardly could the words be understood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O ye elect of God, whose sufferings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Justice and Hope both render less severe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Direct ye us towards the high ascents.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If ye are come secure from this prostration,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wish to find the way most speedily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let your right hands be evermore outside.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus did the Poet ask, and thus was answered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By them somewhat in front of us; whence I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In what was spoken divined the rest concealed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unto my Lord’s eyes mine eyes I turned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence he assented with a cheerful sign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To what the sight of my desire implored.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When of myself I could dispose at will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above that creature did I draw myself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose words before had caused me to take note,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saying: “O Spirit, in whom weeping ripens</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That without which to God we cannot turn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suspend awhile for me thy greater care.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who wast thou, and why are your backs turned upwards,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell me, and if thou wouldst that I procure thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Anything there whence living I departed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “Wherefore our backs the heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turns to itself, know shalt thou; but beforehand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">
						<i xml:lang="">Scias quod ego fui successor Petri.</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between Siestri and Chiaveri descends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A river beautiful, and of its name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The title of my blood its summit makes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A month and little more essayed I how</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weighs the great cloak on him from mire who keeps it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all the other burdens seem a feather.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tardy, ah woe is me! was my conversion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when the Roman Shepherd I was made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then I discovered life to be a lie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw that there the heart was not at rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor farther in that life could one ascend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby the love of this was kindled in me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until that time a wretched soul and parted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From God was I, and wholly avaricious;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now, as thou seest, I here am punished for it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What avarice does is here made manifest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the purgation of these souls converted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And no more bitter pain the Mountain has.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as our eye did not uplift itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aloft, being fastened upon earthly things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So justice here has merged it in the earth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As avarice had extinguished our affection</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For every good, whereby was action lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So justice here doth hold us in restraint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bound and imprisoned by the feet and hands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so long as it pleases the just Lord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall we remain immovable and prostrate.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I on my knees had fallen, and wished to speak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But even as I began, and he was ’ware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Only by listening, of my reverence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What cause,” he said, “has downward bent thee thus?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I to him: “For your own dignity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Standing, my conscience stung me with remorse.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Straighten thy legs, and upward raise thee, brother,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He answered: “Err not, fellow-servant am I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With thee and with the others to one power.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If e’er that holy, evangelic sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which sayeth <i xml:lang="">neque nubent,</i> thou hast heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well canst thou see why in this wise I speak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now go; no longer will I have thee linger,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because thy stay doth incommode my weeping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which I ripen that which thou hast said.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On earth I have a grandchild named Alagia,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Good in herself, unless indeed our house</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Malevolent may make her by example,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she alone remains to me on earth.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-20" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Hugh Capet⁠—The Earthquake.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Ill strives the will against a better will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, to pleasure him, against my pleasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I drew the sponge not saturate from the water.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onward I moved, and onward moved my Leader,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through vacant places, skirting still the rock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As on a wall close to the battlements;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For they that through their eyes pour drop by drop</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The malady which all the world pervades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the other side too near the verge approach.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Accursed mayst thou be, thou old she-wolf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That more than all the other beasts hast prey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because of hunger infinitely hollow!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O heaven, in whose gyrations some appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To think conditions here below are changed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When will he come through whom she shall depart?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onward we went with footsteps slow and scarce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I attentive to the shades I heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Piteously weeping and bemoaning them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I by peradventure heard “Sweet Mary!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uttered in front of us amid the weeping</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as a woman does who is in childbirth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in continuance: “How poor thou wast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is manifested by that hostelry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where thou didst lay thy sacred burden down.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereafterward I heard: “O good Fabricius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Virtue with poverty didst thou prefer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the possession of great wealth with vice.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So pleasurable were these words to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I drew farther onward to have knowledge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Touching that spirit whence they seemed to come.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He furthermore was speaking of the largess</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Nicholas unto the maidens gave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In order to conduct their youth to honor.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O soul that dost so excellently speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell me who wast thou,” said I, “and why only</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou dost renew these praises well deserved?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not without recompense shall be thy word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If I return to finish the short journey</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that life which is flying to its end.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he: “I’ll tell thee, not for any comfort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I may expect from earth, but that so much</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grace shines in thee or ever thou art dead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was the root of that malignant plant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which overshadows all the Christian world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that good fruit is seldom gathered from it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if Douay and Ghent, and Lille and Bruges</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had Power, soon vengeance would be taken on it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this I pray of Him who judges all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hugh Capet was I called upon the earth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From me were born the Louises and Philips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By whom in later days has France been governed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was the son of a Parisian butcher,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What time the ancient kings had perished all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Excepting one, contrite in cloth of gray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I found me grasping in my hands the rein</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the realm’s government, and so great power</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of new acquest, and so with friends abounding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to the widowed diadem promoted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The head of mine own offspring was, from whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The consecrated bones of these began.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So long as the great dowry of Provence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of my blood took not the sense of shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twas little worth, but still it did no harm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then it began with falsehood and with force</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its rapine; and thereafter, for amends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Took Ponthieu, Normandy, and Gascony.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charles came to Italy, and for amends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A victim made of Conradin, and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrust Thomas back to heaven, for amends.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A time I see, not very distant now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which draweth forth another Charles from France,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The better to make known both him and his.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unarmed he goes, and only with the lance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Judas jousted with; and that he thrusts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that he makes the paunch of Florence burst.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He thence not land, but sin and infamy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall gain, so much more grievous to himself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As the more light such damage he accounts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other, now gone forth, ta’en in his ship,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">See I his daughter sell, and chaffer for her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As corsairs do with other female slaves.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What more, O Avarice, canst thou do to us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since thou my blood so to thyself hast drawn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It careth not for its own proper flesh?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That less may seem the future ill and past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I see the flower-de-luce Alagna enter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Christ in his own Vicar captive made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see him yet another time derided;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I see renewed the vinegar and gall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And between living thieves I see him slain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see the modern Pilate so relentless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This does not sate him, but without decretal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He to the temple bears his sordid sails!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, O my Lord! shall I be joyful made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By looking on the vengeance which, concealed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Makes sweet thine anger in thy secrecy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What I was saying of that only bride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the Holy Ghost, and which occasioned thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To turn towards me for some commentary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So long has been ordained to all our prayers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As the day lasts; but when the night comes on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Contrary sound we take instead thereof.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At that time we repeat Pygmalion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom a traitor, thief, and parricide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made his insatiable desire of gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the misery of avaricious Midas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That followed his inordinate demand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At which forevermore one needs but laugh.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The foolish Achan each one then records,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how he stole the spoils; so that the wrath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Joshua still appears to sting him here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then we accuse Sapphira with her husband,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We laud the hoof-beats Heliodorus had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the whole mount in infamy encircles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Polymnestor who murdered Polydorus.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here finally is cried: ‘O Crassus, tell us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thou dost know, what is the taste of gold?’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes we speak, one loud, another low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">According to desire of speech, that spurs us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To greater now and now to lesser pace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in the good that here by day is talked of,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Erewhile alone I was not; yet near by</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No other person lifted up his voice.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From him already we departed were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made endeavour to o’ercome the road</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As much as was permitted to our power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I perceived, like something that is falling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mountain tremble, whence a chill seized on me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As seizes him who to his death is going.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Certes so violently shook not Delos,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before Latona made her nest therein</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To give birth to the two eyes of the heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then upon all sides there began a cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such that the Master drew himself towards me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying, “Fear not, while I am guiding thee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Gloria in excelsis Deo,” all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were saying, from what near I comprehended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where it was possible to hear the cry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We paused immovable and in suspense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as the shepherds who first heard that song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until the trembling ceased, and it was finished.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then we resumed again our holy path,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Watching the shades that lay upon the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Already turned to their accustomed plaint.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No ignorance ever with so great a strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had rendered me importunate to know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If erreth not in this my memory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As meditating then I seemed to have;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor out of haste to question did I dare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor of myself I there could aught perceive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So I went onward timorous and thoughtful.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-21" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Poet Statius.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The natural thirst, that ne’er is satisfied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Excepting with the water for whose grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The woman of Samaria besought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Put me in travail, and haste goaded me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the encumbered path behind my Leader</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I was pitying that righteous vengeance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo! in the same manner as Luke writeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Christ appeared to two upon the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the sepulchral cave already risen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shade appeared to us, and came behind us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down gazing on the prostrate multitude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor were we ware of it, until it spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saying, “My brothers, may God give you peace!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We turned us suddenly, and Virgilius rendered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him the countersign thereto conforming.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereon began he: “In the blessed council,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thee may the court veracious place in peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That me doth banish in eternal exile!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“How,” said he, and the while we went with speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“If ye are shades whom God deigns not on high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who up his stairs so far has guided you?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said my Teacher: “If thou note the marks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which this one bears, and which the Angel traces</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well shalt thou see he with the good must reign.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But because she who spinneth day and night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For him had not yet drawn the distaff off,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Clotho lays for each one and compacts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His soul, which is thy sister and my own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In coming upwards could not come alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By reason that it sees not in our fashion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence I was drawn from out the ample throat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Hell to be his guide, and I shall guide him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As far on as my school has power to lead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But tell us, if thou knowest, why such a shudder</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Erewhile the mountain gave, and why together</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All seemed to cry, as far as its moist feet?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In asking he so hit the very eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of my desire, that merely with the hope</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My thirst became the less unsatisfied.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Naught is there,” he began, “that without order</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May the religion of the mountain feel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor aught that may be foreign to its custom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Free is it here from every permutation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What from itself heaven in itself receiveth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can be of this the cause, and naught beside;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because that neither rain, nor hail, nor snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor dew, nor hoarfrost any higher falls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than the short, little stairway of three steps.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dense clouds do not appear, nor rarefied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor coruscation, nor the daughter of Thaumas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That often upon earth her region shifts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No arid vapor any farther rises</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than to the top of the three steps I spake of,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereon the Vicar of Peter has his feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lower down perchance it trembles less or more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, for the wind that in the earth is hidden</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I know not how, up here it never trembled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It trembles here, whenever any soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feels itself pure, so that it soars, or moves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To mount aloft, and such a cry attends it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of purity the will alone gives proof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, being wholly free to change its convent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Takes by surprise the soul, and helps it fly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First it wills well; but the desire permits not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which divine justice with the selfsame will</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There was to sin, upon the torment sets.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, who have been lying in this pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Five hundred years and more, but just now felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A free volition for a better seat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore thou heardst the earthquake, and the pious</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spirits along the mountain rendering praise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the Lord, that soon he speed them upwards.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So said he to him; and since we enjoy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As much in drinking as the thirst is great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I could not say how much it did me good.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the wise Leader: “Now I see the net</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That snares you here, and how ye are set free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why the earth quakes, and wherefore ye rejoice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now who thou wast be pleased that I may know;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And why so many centuries thou hast here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Been lying, let me gather from thy words.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“In days when the good Titus, with the aid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the supremest King, avenged the wounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence issued forth the blood by Judas sold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the name that most endures and honors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was I on earth,” that spirit made reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Greatly renowned, but not with faith as yet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My vocal spirit was so sweet, that Rome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me, a Thoulousian, drew unto herself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where I deserved to deck my brows with myrtle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Statius the people name me still on earth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I sang of Thebes, and then of great Achilles;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But on the way fell with my second burden.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The seeds unto my ardour were the sparks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that celestial flame which heated me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby more than a thousand have been fired;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the Aeneid speak I, which to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A mother was, and was my nurse in song;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without this weighed I not a drachma’s weight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to have lived upon the earth what time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Virgilius lived, I would accept one sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More than I must ere issuing from my ban.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These words towards me made Virgilius turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With looks that in their silence said, “Be silent!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet the power that wills cannot do all things;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For tears and laughter are such pursuivants</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the passion from which each springs forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the most truthful least the will they follow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I only smiled, as one who gives the wink;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat the shade was silent, and it gazed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into mine eyes, where most expression dwells;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, “As thou well mayst consummate a labor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So great,” it said, “why did thy face just now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Display to me the lightning of a smile?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now am I caught on this side and on that;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One keeps me silent, one to speak conjures me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore I sigh, and I am understood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Speak,” said my Master, “and be not afraid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of speaking, but speak out, and say to him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What he demands with such solicitude.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence I: “Thou peradventure marvellest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O antique spirit, at the smile I gave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I will have more wonder seize upon thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This one, who guides on high these eyes of mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is that Virgilius, from whom thou didst learn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sing aloud of men and of the Gods.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If other cause thou to my smile imputedst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abandon it as false, and trust it was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those words which thou hast spoken concerning him.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already he was stooping to embrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Teacher’s feet; but he said to him: “Brother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do not; for shade thou art, and shade beholdest.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he uprising: “Now canst thou the sum</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of love which warms me to thee comprehend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When this our vanity I disremember,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Treating a shadow as substantial thing.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-22" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Sixth Circle⁠—The Gluttonous⁠—The Mystic Tree.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Already was the Angel left behind us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Angel who to the sixth round had turned us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having erased one mark from off my face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And those who have in justice their desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had said to us, “Beati,” in their voices,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With “sitio,” and without more ended it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, more light than through the other passes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Went onward so, that without any labor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I followed upward the swift-footed spirits;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thus Virgilius began: “The love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kindled by virtue aye another kindles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Provided outwardly its flame appear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence from the hour that Juvenal descended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among us into the infernal Limbo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who made apparent to me thy affection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My kindliness towards thee was as great</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ever bound one to an unseen person,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that these stairs will now seem short to me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But tell me, and forgive me as a friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If too great confidence let loose the rein,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as a friend now hold discourse with me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How was it possible within thy breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For avarice to find place, ’mid so much wisdom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As thou wast filled with by thy diligence?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These words excited Statius at first</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Somewhat to laughter; afterward he answered:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Each word of thine is love’s dear sign to me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Verily oftentimes do things appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which give fallacious matter to our doubts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Instead of the true causes which are hidden!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy question shows me thy belief to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I was niggard in the other life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It may be from the circle where I was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore know thou, that avarice was removed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too far from me; and this extravagance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thousands of lunar periods have punished.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And were it not that I my thoughts uplifted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I the passage heard where thou exclaimest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if indignant, unto human nature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘To what impellest thou not, O cursed hunger</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of gold, the appetite of mortal men?’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Revolving I should feel the dismal joustings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then I perceived the hands could spread too wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their wings in spending, and repented me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As well of that as of my other sins;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How many with shorn hair shall rise again</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because of ignorance, which from this sin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cuts off repentance living and in death!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And know that the transgression which rebuts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By direct opposition any sin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Together with it here its verdure dries.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore if I have been among that folk</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which mourns its avarice, to purify me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For its opposite has this befallen me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now when thou sangest the relentless weapons</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the twofold affliction of Jocasta,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The singer of the Songs Bucolic said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“From that which Clio there with thee preludes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It does not seem that yet had made thee faithful</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That faith without which no good works suffice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If this be so, what candles or what sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scattered thy darkness so that thou didst trim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy sails behind the Fisherman thereafter?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to him: “Thou first directedst me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towards Parnassus, in its grots to drink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And first concerning God didst me enlighten.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou didst as he who walketh in the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who bears his light behind, which helps him not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wary makes the persons after him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thou didst say: ‘The age renews itself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Justice returns, and man’s primeval time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a new progeny descends from heaven.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through thee I Poet was, through thee a Christian;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that thou better see what I design,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To color it will I extend my hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already was the world in every part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pregnant with the true creed, disseminated</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By messengers of the eternal kingdom;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy assertion, spoken of above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the new preachers was in unison;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence I to visit them the custom took.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then they became so holy in my sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, when Domitian persecuted them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not without tears of mine were their laments;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the while that I on earth remained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them I befriended, and their upright customs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made me disparage all the other sects.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ere I led the Greeks unto the rivers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Thebes, in poetry, I was baptized,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But out of fear was covertly a Christian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For a long time professing paganism;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this lukewarmness caused me the fourth circle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To circuit round more than four centuries.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou, therefore, who hast raised the covering</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hid from me whatever good I speak of,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While in ascending we have time to spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me, in what place is our friend Terentius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Caecilius, Plautus, Varro, if thou knowest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell me if they are damned, and in what alley.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“These, Persius and myself, and others many,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Replied my Leader, “with that Grecian are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom more than all the rest the Muses suckled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the first circle of the prison blind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ofttimes we of the mountain hold discourse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which has our nurses ever with itself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Euripides is with us, Antiphon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Simonides, Agatho, and many other</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Greeks who of old their brows with laurel decked.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There some of thine own people may be seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Antigone, Deiphile and Argia,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there Ismene mournful as of old.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There she is seen who pointed out Langia;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There is Tiresias’ daughter, and there Thetis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there Deidamia with her sisters.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silent already were the poets both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Attent once more in looking round about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the ascent and from the walls released;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And four handmaidens of the day already</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were left behind, and at the pole the fifth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was pointing upward still its burning horn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What time my Guide: “I think that tow’rds the edge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our dexter shoulders it behoves us turn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Circling the mount as we are wont to do.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus in that region custom was our ensign;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And we resumed our way with less suspicion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the assenting of that worthy soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They in advance went on, and I alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behind them, and I listened to their speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which gave me lessons in the art of song.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But soon their sweet discourses interrupted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A tree which midway in the road we found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With apples sweet and grateful to the smell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even as a fir-tree tapers upward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From bough to bough, so downwardly did that;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I think in order that no one might climb it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On that side where our pathway was enclosed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fell from the lofty rock a limpid water,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spread itself abroad upon the leaves.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Poets twain unto the tree drew near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from among the foliage a voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cried: “Of this food ye shall have scarcity.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then said: “More thoughtful Mary was of making</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The marriage feast complete and honorable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than of her mouth which now for you responds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for their drink the ancient Roman women</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With water were content; and Daniel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disparaged food, and understanding won.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The primal age was beautiful as gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Acorns it made with hunger savorous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nectar every rivulet with thirst.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Honey and locusts were the aliments</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fed the Baptist in the wilderness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence he is glorious, and so magnified</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As by the Evangel is revealed to you.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-23" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Forese.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The while among the verdant leaves mine eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I riveted, as he is wont to do</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who wastes his life pursuing little birds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My more than Father said unto me: “Son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come now; because the time that is ordained us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More usefully should be apportioned out.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I turned my face and no less soon my steps</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the Sages, who were speaking so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They made the going of no cost to me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo! were heard a song and a lament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Labia mea, Domine,” in fashion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such that delight and dolence it brought forth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O my sweet Father, what is this I hear?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began I; and he answered: “Shades that go</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps the knot unloosing of their debt.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the same way that thoughtful pilgrims do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, unknown people on the road o’ertaking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turn themselves round to them, and do not stop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even thus, behind us with a swifter motion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Coming and passing onward, gazed upon us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A crowd of spirits silent and devout.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each in his eyes was dark and cavernous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pallid in face, and so emaciate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from the bones the skin did shape itself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I do not think that so to merest rind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could Erisichthon have been withered up</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By famine, when most fear he had of it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thinking within myself I said: “Behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This is the folk who lost Jerusalem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Mary made a prey of her own son.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their sockets were like rings without the gems;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whoever in the face of men reads <i xml:lang="">omo</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might well in these have recognized the <em>m</em>.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who would believe the odor of an apple,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Begetting longing, could consume them so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that of water, without knowing how?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I still was wondering what so famished them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the occasion not yet manifest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of their emaciation and sad squalor;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo! from out the hollow of his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His eyes a shade turned on me, and looked keenly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then cried aloud: “What grace to me is this?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never should I have known him by his look;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in his voice was evident to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That which his aspect had suppressed within it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This spark within me wholly re-enkindled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My recognition of his altered face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I recalled the features of Forese.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ah, do not look at this dry leprosy,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Entreated he, “which doth my skin discolor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor at default of flesh that I may have;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But tell me truth of thee, and who are those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two souls, that yonder make for thee an escort;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do not delay in speaking unto me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“That face of thine, which dead I once bewept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gives me for weeping now no lesser grief,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I answered him, “beholding it so changed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But tell me, for God’s sake, what thus denudes you?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make me not speak while I am marvelling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ill speaks he who’s full of other longings.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “From the eternal council</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Falls power into the water and the tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behind us left, whereby I grow so thin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All of this people who lamenting sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For following beyond measure appetite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hunger and thirst are here re-sanctified.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desire to eat and drink enkindles in us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The scent that issues from the apple-tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from the spray that sprinkles o’er the verdure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not a single time alone, this ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Encompassing, is refreshed our pain⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I say our pain, and ought to say our solace⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the same wish doth lead us to the tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which led the Christ rejoicing to say <i xml:lang="">Eli</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When with his veins he liberated us.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I to him: “Forese, from that day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When for a better life thou changedst worlds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up to this time five years have not rolled round.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If sooner were the power exhausted in thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sinning more, than thee the hour surprised</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that good sorrow which to God reweds us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How hast thou come up hitherward already?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I thought to find thee down there underneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where time for time doth restitution make.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “Thus speedily has led me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To drink of the sweet wormwood of these torments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Nella with her overflowing tears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She with her prayers devout and with her sighs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has drawn me from the coast where one where one awaits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from the other circles set me free.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much more dear and pleasing is to God</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My little widow, whom so much I loved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in good works she is the more alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the Barbagia of Sardinia</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By far more modest in its women is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than the Barbagia I have left her in.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O brother sweet, what wilt thou have me say?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A future time is in my sight already,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which this hour will not be very old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When from the pulpit shall be interdicted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the unblushing womankind of Florence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To go about displaying breast and paps.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What savages were e’er, what Saracens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who stood in need, to make them covered go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of spiritual or other discipline?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if the shameless women were assured</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of what swift Heaven prepares for them, already</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wide open would they have their mouths to howl;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For if my foresight here deceive me not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They shall be sad ere he has bearded cheeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who now is hushed to sleep with lullaby.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O brother, now no longer hide thee from me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">See that not only I, but all these people</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are gazing there, where thou dost veil the sun.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence I to him: “If thou bring back to mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What thou with me hast been and I with thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The present memory will be grievous still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of that life he turned me back who goes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In front of me, two days agone when round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sister of him yonder showed herself,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the sun I pointed. “Through the deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Night of the truly dead has this one led me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With this true flesh, that follows after him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thence his encouragements have led me up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ascending and still circling round the mount</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That you doth straighten, whom the world made crooked.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He says that he will bear me company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till I shall be where Beatrice will be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There it behoves me to remain without him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is Virgilius, who thus says to me,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him I pointed at; “the other is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shade for whom just now shook every slope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your realm, that from itself discharges him.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-24" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Buonagiunta da Lucca⁠—Pope Martin <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, and others.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Nor speech the going, nor the going that</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Slackened; but talking we went bravely on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as a vessel urged by a good wind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shadows, that appeared things doubly dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From out the sepulchres of their eyes betrayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wonder at me, aware that I was living.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, continuing my colloquy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said: “Peradventure he goes up more slowly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than he would do, for other people’s sake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But tell me, if thou knowest, where is Piccarda;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell me if anyone of note I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among this folk that gazes at me so.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My sister, who, ’twixt beautiful and good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I know not which was more, triumphs rejoicing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Already in her crown on high Olympus.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So said he first, and then: “ ’Tis not forbidden</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To name each other here, so milked away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is our resemblance by our dieting.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This,” pointing with his finger, “is Buonagiunta,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Buonagiunta, of Lucca; and that face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beyond him there, more peaked than the others,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has held the holy Church within his arms;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Tours was he, and purges by his fasting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bolsena’s eels and the Vernaccia wine.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He named me many others one by one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all contented seemed at being named,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that for this I saw not one dark look.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw for hunger bite the empty air</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ubaldin dalla Pila, and Boniface,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with his crook had pastured many people.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw Messer Marchese, who had leisure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Once at Forli for drinking with less dryness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he was one who ne’er felt satisfied.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as he does who scans, and then doth prize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One more than others, did I him of Lucca,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who seemed to take most cognizance of me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He murmured, and I know not what Gentucca</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that place heard I, where he felt the wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of justice, that doth macerate them so.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O soul,” I said, “that seemest so desirous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To speak with me, do so that I may hear thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with thy speech appease thyself and me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“A maid is born, and wears not yet the veil,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began he, “who to thee shall pleasant make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My city, howsoever men may blame it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt go on thy way with this prevision;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If by my murmuring thou hast been deceived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">True things hereafter will declare it to thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But say if him I here behold, who forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Evoked the new-invented rhymes, beginning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">‘Ladies, that have intelligence of love?’ ”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I to him: “One am I, who, whenever</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love doth inspire me, note, and in that measure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he within me dictates, singing go.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O brother, now I see,” he said, “the knot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which me, the Notary, and Guittone held</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Short of the sweet new style that now I hear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I do perceive full clearly how your pens</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Go closely following after him who dictates,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with our own forsooth came not to pass;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he who sets himself to go beyond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No difference sees from one style to another;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as if satisfied, he held his peace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as the birds, that winter tow’rds the Nile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes into a phalanx form themselves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then fly in greater haste, and go in file;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In such wise all the people who were there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turning their faces, hurried on their steps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both by their leanness and their wishes light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as a man, who weary is with trotting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lets his companions onward go, and walks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until he vents the panting of his chest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So did Forese let the holy flock</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pass by, and came with me behind it, saying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“When will it be that I again shall see thee?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“How long,” I answered, “I may live, I know not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet my return will not so speedy be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I shall sooner in desire arrive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because the place where I was set to live</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From day to day of good is more depleted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto dismal ruin seems ordained.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now go,” he said, “for him most guilty of it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At a beast’s tail behold I dragged along</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towards the valley where is no repentance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faster at every step the beast is going,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Increasing evermore until it smites him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And leaves the body vilely mutilated.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not long those wheels shall turn,” and he uplifted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His eyes to heaven, “ere shall be clear to thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That which my speech no farther can declare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now stay behind; because the time so precious</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is in this kingdom, that I lose too much</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By coming onward thus abreast with thee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As sometimes issues forth upon a gallop</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A cavalier from out a troop that ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seeks the honor of the first encounter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So he with greater strides departed from us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on the road remained I with those two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who were such mighty marshals of the world.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when before us he had gone so far</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mine eyes became to him such pursuivants</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As was my understanding to his words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appeared to me with laden and living boughs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another apple-tree, and not far distant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From having but just then turned thitherward.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>People I saw beneath it lift their hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cry I know not what towards the leaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like little children eager and deluded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who pray, and he they pray to doth not answer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, to make very keen their appetite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Holds their desire aloft, and hides it not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then they departed as if undeceived;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now we came unto the mighty tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which prayers and tears so manifold refuses.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Pass farther onward without drawing near;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The tree of which Eve ate is higher up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And out of that one has this tree been raised.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus said I know not who among the branches;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat Virgilius, Statius, and myself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Went crowding forward on the side that rises.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Be mindful,” said he, “of the accursed ones</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Formed of the cloud-rack, who inebriate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Combated Theseus with their double breasts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of the Jews who showed them soft in drinking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence Gideon would not have them for companions</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When he tow’rds Midian the hills descended.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus, closely pressed to one of the two borders,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On passed we, hearing sins of gluttony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Followed forsooth by miserable gains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then set at large upon the lonely road,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thousand steps and more we onward went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In contemplation, each without a word.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What go ye thinking thus, ye three alone?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said suddenly a voice, whereat I started</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As terrified and timid beasts are wont.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I raised my head to see who this might be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And never in a furnace was there seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Metals or glass so lucent and so red</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As one I saw who said: “If it may please you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To mount aloft, here it behoves you turn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This way goes he who goeth after peace.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His aspect had bereft me of my sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that I turned me back unto my Teachers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like one who goeth as his hearing guides him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as, the harbinger of early dawn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The air of May doth move and breathe out fragrance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Impregnate all with herbage and with flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So did I feel a breeze strike in the midst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My front, and felt the moving of the plumes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That breathed around an odor of ambrosia;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heard it said: “Blessed are they whom grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much illumines, that the love of taste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Excites not in their breasts too great desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hungering at all times so far as is just.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-25" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Discourse of Statius on Generation⁠—The Seventh Circle⁠—The Wanton.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now was it the ascent no hindrance brooked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because the sun had his meridian circle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Taurus left, and night to Scorpio;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore as doth a man who tarries not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But goes his way, whate’er to him appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If of necessity the sting transfix him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this wise did we enter through the gap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Taking the stairway, one before the other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which by its narrowness divides the climbers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as the little stork that lifts its wing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a desire to fly, and does not venture</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To leave the nest, and lets it downward droop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even such was I, with the desire of asking</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kindled and quenched, unto the motion coming</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He makes who doth address himself to speak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not for our pace, though rapid it might be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My father sweet forbore, but said: “Let fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bow of speech thou to the barb hast drawn.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With confidence I opened then my mouth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I began: “How can one meagre grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where the need of nutriment applies not?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If thou wouldst call to mind how Meleager</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was wasted by the wasting of a brand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This would not,” said he, “be to thee so sour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wouldst thou think how at each tremulous motion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trembles within a mirror your own image;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That which seems hard would mellow seem to thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that thou mayst content thee in thy wish</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo Statius here; and him I call and pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He now will be the healer of thy wounds.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If I unfold to him the eternal vengeance,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Responded Statius, “where thou present art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be my excuse that I can naught deny thee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he began: “Son, if these words of mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy mind doth contemplate and doth receive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They’ll be thy light unto the How thou sayest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The perfect blood, which never is drunk up</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the thirsty veins, and which remaineth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like food that from the table thou removest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Takes in the heart for all the human members</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Virtue informative, as being that</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to be changed to them goes through the veins</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again digest, descends it where ’tis better</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Silent to be than say; and then drops thence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon another’s blood in natural vase.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There one together with the other mingles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One to be passive meant, the other active</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By reason of the perfect place it springs from;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And being conjoined, begins to operate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Coagulating first, then vivifying</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What for its matter it had made consistent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The active virtue, being made a soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As of a plant, (in so far different,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This on the way is, that arrived already,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then works so much, that now it moves and feels</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a sea-fungus, and then undertakes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To organize the powers whose seed it is.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, Son, dilates and now distends itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The virtue from the generator’s heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where nature is intent on all the members.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But how from animal it man becomes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou dost not see as yet; this is a point</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which made a wiser man than thou once err</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So far, that in his doctrine separate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He made the soul from possible intellect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he no organ saw by this assumed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Open thy breast unto the truth that’s coming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And know that, just as soon as in the foetus</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The articulation of the brain is perfect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The primal Motor turns to it well pleased</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At so great art of nature, and inspires</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A spirit new with virtue all replete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which what it finds there active doth attract</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into its substance, and becomes one soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which lives, and feels, and on itself revolves.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that thou less may wonder at my word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behold the sun’s heat, which becometh wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joined to the juice that from the vine distils.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whenever Lachesis has no more thread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It separates from the flesh, and virtually</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bears with itself the human and divine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other faculties are voiceless all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The memory, the intelligence, and the will</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In action far more vigorous than before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without a pause it falleth of itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In marvellous way on one shore or the other;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There of its roads it first is cognizant.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon as the place there circumscribeth it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The virtue informative rays round about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As, and as much as, in the living members.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even as the air, when full of rain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By alien rays that are therein reflected,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With divers colors shows itself adorned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So there the neighboring air doth shape itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into that form which doth impress upon it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Virtually the soul that has stood still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then in manner of the little flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which followeth the fire where’er it shifts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After the spirit followeth its new form.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since afterwards it takes from this its semblance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is called shade; and thence it organizes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereafter every sense, even to the sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thence is it that we speak, and thence we laugh;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence is it that we form the tears and sighs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That on the mountain thou mayhap hast heard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>According as impress us our desires</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And other affections, so the shade is shaped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this is cause of what thou wonderest at.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now unto the last of all the circles</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had we arrived, and to the right hand turned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And were attentive to another care.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There the embankment shoots forth flames of fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And upward doth the cornice breathe a blast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That drives them back, and from itself sequesters.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence we must needs go on the open side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And one by one; and I did fear the fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On this side, and on that the falling down.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Leader said: “Along this place one ought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To keep upon the eyes a tightened rein,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing that one so easily might err.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Summae Deus clementiae,” in the bosom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the great burning chanted then I heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which made me no less eager to turn round;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spirits saw I walking through the flame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore I looked, to my own steps and theirs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Apportioning my sight from time to time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the close which to that hymn is made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aloud they shouted, “Virum non cognosco;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then recommenced the hymn with voices low.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This also ended, cried they: “To the wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Diana ran, and drove forth Helice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefrom, who had of Venus felt the poison.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to their song returned they; then the wives</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They shouted, and the husbands who were chaste.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As virtue and the marriage vow imposes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I believe that them this mode suffices,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all the time the fire is burning them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such care is it needful, and such food,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the last wound of all should be closed up.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-26" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Guido Guinicelli and Arnaldo Daniello.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>While on the brink thus one before the other</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We went upon our way, oft the good Master</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said: “Take thou heed! suffice it that I warn thee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the right shoulder smote me now the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, raying out, already the whole west</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Changed from its azure aspect into white.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with my shadow did I make the flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Appear more red; and even to such a sign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shades saw I many, as they went, give heed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This was the cause that gave them a beginning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To speak of me; and to themselves began they</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To say: “That seems not a factitious body!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then towards me, as far as they could come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came certain of them, always with regard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not to step forth where they would not be burned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O thou who goest, not from being slower</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But reverent perhaps, behind the others,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Answer me, who in thirst and fire am burning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor to me only is thine answer needful;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all of these have greater thirst for it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than for cold water Ethiop or Indian.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell us how is it that thou makest thyself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A wall unto the sun, as if thou hadst not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Entered as yet into the net of death.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus one of them addressed me, and I straight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should have revealed myself, were I not bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On other novelty that then appeared.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For through the middle of the burning road</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There came a people face to face with these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which held me in suspense with gazing at them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There see I hastening upon either side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each of the shades, and kissing one another</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without a pause, content with brief salute.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus in the middle of their brown battalions</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Muzzle to muzzle one ant meets another</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perchance to spy their journey or their fortune.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sooner is the friendly greeting ended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ever the first footstep passes onward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each one endeavours to outcry the other;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The new-come people: “Sodom and Gomorrah!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rest: “Into the cow Pasiphae enters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the bull unto her lust may run!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then as the cranes, that to Riphaean mountains</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might fly in part, and part towards the sands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These of the frost, those of the sun avoidant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One folk is going, and the other coming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And weeping they return to their first songs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the cry that most befitteth them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And close to me approached, even as before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The very same who had entreated me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Attent to listen in their countenance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, who their inclination twice had seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began: “O souls secure in the possession,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whene’er it may be, of a state of peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neither unripe nor ripened have remained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My members upon earth, but here are with me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With their own blood and their articulations.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I go up here to be no longer blind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Lady is above, who wins this grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby the mortal through your world I bring.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as your greatest longing satisfied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May soon become, so that the Heaven may house you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which full of love is, and most amply spreads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me, that I again in books may write it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who are you, and what is that multitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which goes upon its way behind your backs?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not otherwise with wonder is bewildered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mountaineer, and staring round is dumb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When rough and rustic to the town he goes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than every shade became in its appearance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when they of their stupor were disburdened,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in high hearts is quickly quieted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Blessed be thou, who of our borderlands,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He recommenced who first had questioned us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Experience freightest for a better life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The folk that comes not with us have offended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that for which once Caesar, triumphing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heard himself called in contumely, ‘Queen.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore they separate, exclaiming, ‘Sodom!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Themselves reproving, even as thou hast heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And add unto their burning by their shame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our own transgression was hermaphrodite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But because we observed not human law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Following like unto beasts our appetite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In our opprobrium by us is read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When we part company, the name of her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who bestialized herself in bestial wood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now knowest thou our acts, and what our crime was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wouldst thou perchance by name know who we are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There is not time to tell, nor could I do it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy wish to know me shall in sooth be granted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’m Guido Guinicelli, and now purge me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having repented ere the hour extreme.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same that in the sadness of Lycurgus</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two sons became, their mother re-beholding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such I became, but rise not to such height,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The moment I heard name himself the father</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of me and of my betters, who had ever</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Practised the sweet and gracious rhymes of love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And without speech and hearing thoughtfully</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For a long time I went, beholding him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor for the fire did I approach him nearer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I was fed with looking, utterly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Myself I offered ready for his service,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With affirmation that compels belief.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to me: “Thou leavest footprints such</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In me, from what I hear, and so distinct,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lethe cannot efface them, nor make dim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if thy words just now the truth have sworn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell me what is the cause why thou displayest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In word and look that dear thou holdest me?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I to him: “Those dulcet lays of yours</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, long as shall endure our modern fashion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall make forever dear their very ink!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O brother,” said he, “he whom I point out,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And here he pointed at a spirit in front,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Was of the mother tongue a better smith.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Verses of love and proses of romance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He mastered all; and let the idiots talk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who think the Lemosin surpasses him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To clamor more than truth they turn their faces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in this way establish their opinion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere art or reason has by them been heard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus many ancients with Guittone did,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From cry to cry still giving him applause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until the truth has conquered with most persons.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, if thou hast such ample privilege</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis granted thee to go unto the cloister</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein is Christ the abbot of the college,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him repeat for me a Paternoster,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So far as needful to us of this world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where power of sinning is no longer ours.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, to give place perchance to one behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom he had near, he vanished in the fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As fish in water going to the bottom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I moved a little tow’rds him pointed out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said that to his name my own desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An honorable place was making ready.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He of his own free will began to say:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">
						<i xml:lang="">Tan m’ abellis vostre cortes deman,</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">
						<i xml:lang="">Que jeu nom’ puesc ni vueill a vos cobrire;</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i xml:lang="">Jeu sui Arnaut, que plor e vai chantan;</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">
						<i xml:lang="">Consiros vei la passada folor,</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">
						<i xml:lang="">E vei jauzen lo jorn qu’ esper denan.</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i xml:lang="">Ara vus prec per aquella valor,</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">
						<i xml:lang="">Que vus condus al som de la scalina,</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">
						<i xml:lang="">Sovenga vus a temprar ma dolor.</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then hid him in the fire that purifies them.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-27" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Dante’s Sleep upon the Stairway, and his Dream of Leah⁠—Arrival at the Terrestrial Paradise.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As when he vibrates forth his earliest rays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In regions where his Maker shed his blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(The Ebro falling under lofty Libra,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And waters in the Ganges burnt with noon,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So stood the Sun; hence was the day departing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the glad Angel of God appeared to us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outside the flame he stood upon the verge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chanted forth, “Beati mundo corde,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In voice by far more living than our own.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then: “No one farther goes, souls sanctified,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If first the fire bite not; within it enter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And be not deaf unto the song beyond.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we were close beside him thus he said;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore e’en such became I, when I heard him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he is who is put into the grave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon my clasped hands I straightened me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scanning the fire, and vividly recalling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The human bodies I had once seen burned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards me turned themselves my good Conductors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto me Virgilius said: “My son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here may indeed be torment, but not death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remember thee, remember! and if I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On Geryon have safely guided thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What shall I do now I am nearer God?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Believe for certain, shouldst thou stand a full</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Millennium in the bosom of this flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It could not make thee bald a single hair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if perchance thou think that I deceive thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Draw near to it, and put it to the proof</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With thine own hands upon thy garment’s hem.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now lay aside, now lay aside all fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turn hitherward, and onward come securely;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I still motionless, and ’gainst my conscience!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeing me stand still motionless and stubborn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Somewhat disturbed he said: “Now look thou, Son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twixt Beatrice and thee there is this wall.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As at the name of Thisbe oped his lids</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dying Pyramus, and gazed upon her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What time the mulberry became vermilion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even thus, my obduracy being softened,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I turned to my wise Guide, hearing the name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in my memory evermore is welling.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat he wagged his head, and said: “How now?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall we stay on this side?” then smiled as one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does at a child who’s vanquished by an apple.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then into the fire in front of me he entered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beseeching Statius to come after me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who a long way before divided us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I was in it, into molten glass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I would have cast me to refresh myself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So without measure was the burning there!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my sweet Father, to encourage me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Discoursing still of Beatrice went on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying: “Her eyes I seem to see already!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A voice, that on the other side was singing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Directed us, and we, attent alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On that, came forth where the ascent began.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Venite, benedicti Patris mei,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sounded within a splendour, which was there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such it o’ercame me, and I could not look.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The sun departs,” it added, “and night cometh;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tarry ye not, but onward urge your steps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long as yet the west becomes not dark.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Straight forward through the rock the path ascended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In such a way that I cut off the rays</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before me of the sun, that now was low.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of few stairs we yet had made assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere by the vanished shadow the sun’s setting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behind us we perceived, I and my Sages.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ere in all its parts immeasurable</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The horizon of one aspect had become,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Night her boundless dispensation held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each of us of a stair had made his bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because the nature of the mount took from us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The power of climbing, more than the delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as in ruminating passive grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The goats, who have been swift and venturesome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the mountain-tops ere they were fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hushed in the shadow, while the sun is hot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Watched by the herdsman, who upon his staff</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is leaning, and in leaning tendeth them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as the shepherd, lodging out of doors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Passes the night beside his quiet flock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Watching that no wild beast may scatter it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such at that hour were we, all three of us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I like the goat, and like the herdsmen they,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Begirt on this side and on that by rocks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Little could there be seen of things without;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But through that little I beheld the stars</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More luminous and larger than their wont.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus ruminating, and beholding these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sleep seized upon me⁠—sleep, that oftentimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before a deed is done has tidings of it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was the hour, I think, when from the East</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First on the mountain Citherea beamed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with the fire of love seems always burning;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Youthful and beautiful in dreams methought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw a lady walking in a meadow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gathering flowers; and singing she was saying:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Know whosoever may my name demand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I am Leah, and go moving round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My beauteous hands to make myself a garland.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To please me at the mirror, here I deck me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But never does my sister Rachel leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her looking-glass, and sitteth all day long.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see her beauteous eyes as eager is she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I am to adorn me with my hands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her, seeing, and me, doing satisfies.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now before the antelucan splendours</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That unto pilgrims the more grateful rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As, home-returning, less remote they lodge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The darkness fled away on every side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And slumber with it; whereupon I rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing already the great Masters risen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“That apple sweet, which through so many branches</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The care of mortals goeth in pursuit of,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Today shall put in peace thy hungerings.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speaking to me, Virgilius of such words</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As these made use; and never were there guerdons</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That could in pleasantness compare with these.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such longing upon longing came upon me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be above, that at each step thereafter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For flight I felt in me the pinions growing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When underneath us was the stairway all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Run o’er, and we were on the highest step,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Virgilius fastened upon me his eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said: “The temporal fire and the eternal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Son, thou hast seen, and to a place art come</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where of myself no farther I discern.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By intellect and art I here have brought thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Take thine own pleasure for thy guide henceforth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beyond the steep ways and the narrow art thou.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold the sun, that shines upon thy forehead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behold the grass, the flowerets, and the shrubs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of itself alone this land produces.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until rejoicing come the beauteous eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which weeping caused me to come unto thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou canst sit down, and thou canst walk among them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Expect no more or word or sign from me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Free and upright and sound is thy freewill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And error were it not to do its bidding;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee o’er thyself I therefore crown and mitre!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-28" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Terrestrial Paradise⁠—The River Lethe⁠—Matilda.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Eager already to search in and round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heavenly forest, dense and living-green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which tempered to the eyes the newborn day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Withouten more delay I left the bank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Taking the level country slowly, slowly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the soil that everywhere breathes fragrance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A softly-breathing air, that no mutation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had in itself, upon the forehead smote me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No heavier blow than of a gentle wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat the branches, lightly tremulous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did all of them bow downward toward that side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where its first shadow casts the Holy Mountain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet not from their upright direction swayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the little birds upon their tops</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should leave the practice of each art of theirs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with full ravishment the hours of prime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Singing, received they in the midst of leaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever bore a burden to their rhymes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as from branch to branch goes gathering on</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the pine forest on the shore of Chiassi,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Eolus unlooses the Sirocco.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already my slow steps had carried me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the ancient wood so far, that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could not perceive where I had entered it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo! my further course a stream cut off,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which tow’rd the left hand with its little waves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bent down the grass that on its margin sprang.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All waters that on earth most limpid are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would seem to have within themselves some mixture</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Compared with that which nothing doth conceal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although it moves on with a brown, brown current</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the shade perpetual, that never</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ray of the sun lets in, nor of the moon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With feet I stayed, and with mine eyes I passed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beyond the rivulet, to look upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The great variety of the fresh may.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there appeared to me (even as appears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suddenly something that doth turn aside</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through very wonder every other thought)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lady all alone, who went along</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Singing and culling floweret after floweret,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which her pathway was all painted over.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ah, beauteous lady, who in rays of love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dost warm thyself, if I may trust to looks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which the heart’s witnesses are wont to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May the desire come unto thee to draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Near to this river’s bank,” I said to her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“So much that I might hear what thou art singing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou makest me remember where and what</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proserpina that moment was when lost</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her mother her, and she herself the Spring.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As turns herself, with feet together pressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the ground, a lady who is dancing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hardly puts one foot before the other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the vermilion and the yellow flowerets</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She turned towards me, not in other wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than maiden who her modest eyes casts down;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my entreaties made to be content,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So near approaching, that the dulcet sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came unto me together with its meaning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as she was where the grasses are.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bathed by the waters of the beauteous river,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lift her eyes she granted me the boon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I do not think there shone so great a light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the lids of Venus, when transfixed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By her own son, beyond his usual custom!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Erect upon the other bank she smiled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bearing full many colors in her hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which that high land produces without seed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apart three paces did the river make us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Hellespont, where Xerxes passed across,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(A curb still to all human arrogance,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More hatred from Leander did not suffer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For rolling between Sestos and Abydos,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than that from me, because it oped not then.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ye are newcomers; and because I smile,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began she, “peradventure, in this place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Elect to human nature for its nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some apprehension keeps you marvelling;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the psalm <i xml:lang="">Delectasti</i> giveth light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which has the power to uncloud your intellect.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou who foremost art, and didst entreat me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Speak, if thou wouldst hear more; for I came ready</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To all thy questionings, as far as needful.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The water,” said I, “and the forest’s sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are combating within me my new faith</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In something which I heard opposed to this.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence she: “I will relate how from its cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proceedeth that which maketh thee to wonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And purge away the cloud that smites upon thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Good Supreme, sole in itself delighting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Created man good, and this goodly place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gave him as hansel of eternal peace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By his default short while he sojourned here;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By his default to weeping and to toil</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He changed his innocent laughter and sweet play.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the disturbance which below is made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By exhalations of the land and water,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Which far as may be follow after heat,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might not upon mankind wage any war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This mount ascended tow’rds the heaven so high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And is exempt, from there where it is locked.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now since the universal atmosphere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turns in a circuit with the primal motion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unless the circle is broken on some side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon this height, that all is disengaged</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In living ether, doth this motion strike</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make the forest sound, for it is dense;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so much power the stricken plant possesses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with its virtue it impregns the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this, revolving, scatters it around;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yonder earth, according as ’tis worthy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In self or in its clime, conceives and bears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of divers qualities the divers trees;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It should not seem a marvel then on earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This being heard, whenever any plant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without seed manifest there taketh root.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou must know, this holy tableland</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which thou art is full of every seed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fruit has in it never gathered there.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The water which thou seest springs not from vein</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Restored by vapor that the cold condenses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to a stream that gains or loses breath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But issues from a fountain safe and certain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which by the will of God as much regains</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it discharges, open on two sides.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon this side with virtue it descends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which takes away all memory of sin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On that, of every good deed done restores it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here Lethe, as upon the other side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eunoe, it is called; and worketh not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If first on either side it be not tasted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This every other savour doth transcend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And notwithstanding slaked so far may be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy thirst, that I reveal to thee no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll give thee a corollary still in grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor think my speech will be to thee less dear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If it spread out beyond my promise to thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those who in ancient times have feigned in song</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Age of Gold and its felicity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dreamed of this place perhaps upon Parnassus.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here was the human race in innocence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here evermore was Spring, and every fruit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This is the nectar of which each one speaks.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then backward did I turn me wholly round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto my Poets, and saw that with a smile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They had been listening to these closing words;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to the beautiful lady turned mine eyes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-29" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Triumph of the Church.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Singing like unto an enamoured lady</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She, with the ending of her words, continued:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Beati quorum tecta sunt peccata.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even as Nymphs, that wandered all alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among the sylvan shadows, sedulous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One to avoid and one to see the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She then against the stream moved onward, going</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the bank, and I abreast of her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her little steps with little steps attending.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between her steps and mine were not a hundred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When equally the margins gave a turn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In such a way, that to the East I faced.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor even thus our way continued far</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before the lady wholly turned herself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto me, saying, “Brother, look and listen!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo! a sudden lustre ran across</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On every side athwart the spacious forest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such that it made me doubt if it were lightning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But since the lightning ceases as it comes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that continuing brightened more and more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within my thought I said, “What thing is this?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a delicious melody there ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the luminous air, whence holy zeal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made me rebuke the hardihood of Eve;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For there where earth and heaven obedient were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The woman only, and but just created,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could not endure to stay ’neath any veil;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Underneath which had she devoutly stayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I sooner should have tasted those delights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ineffable, and for a longer time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While ’mid such manifold first-fruits I walked</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the eternal pleasure all enrapt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And still solicitous of more delights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In front of us like an enkindled fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Became the air beneath the verdant boughs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the sweet sound as singing now was heard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Virgins sacrosanct! if ever hunger,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vigils, or cold for you I have endured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The occasion spurs me their reward to claim!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now Helicon must needs pour forth for me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her choir Urania must assist me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To put in verse things difficult to think.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little farther on, seven trees of gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In semblance the long space still intervening</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Between ourselves and them did counterfeit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when I had approached so near to them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The common object, which the sense deceives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lost not by distance any of its marks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The faculty that lends discourse to reason</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did apprehend that they were candlesticks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the voices of the song “Hosanna!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above them flamed the harness beautiful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far brighter than the moon in the serene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of midnight, at the middle of her month.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I turned me round, with admiration filled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To good Virgilius, and he answered me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With visage no less full of wonderment.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then back I turned my face to those high things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which moved themselves towards us so sedately,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They had been distanced by new-wedded brides.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lady chid me: “Why dost thou burn only</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So with affection for the living lights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dost not look at what comes after them?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then saw I people, as behind their leaders,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Coming behind them, garmented in white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And such a whiteness never was on earth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The water on my left flank was resplendent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And back to me reflected my left side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">E’en as a mirror, if I looked therein.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I upon my margin had such post</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nothing but the stream divided us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Better to see I gave my steps repose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I beheld the flamelets onward go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leaving behind themselves the air depicted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they of trailing pennons had the semblance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that it overhead remained distinct</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sevenfold lists, all of them of the colors</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence the sun’s bow is made, and Delia’s girdle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These standards to the rearward longer were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than was my sight; and, as it seemed to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ten paces were the outermost apart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under so fair a heaven as I describe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The four and twenty Elders, two by two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came on incoronate with flower-de-luce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They all of them were singing: “Blessed thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among the daughters of Adam art, and blessed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For evermore shall be thy loveliness.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the flowers and other tender grasses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In front of me upon the other margin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were disencumbered of that race elect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as in heaven star followeth after star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There came close after them four animals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Incoronate each one with verdant leaf.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Plumed with six wings was every one of them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The plumage full of eyes; the eyes of Argus</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If they were living would be such as these.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reader! to trace their forms no more I waste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My rhymes; for other spendings press me so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I in this cannot be prodigal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But read Ezekiel, who depicteth them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he beheld them from the region cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Coming with cloud, with whirlwind, and with fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And such as thou shalt find them in his pages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such were they here; saving that in their plumage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">John is with me, and differeth from him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The interval between these four contained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A chariot triumphal on two wheels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which by a Griffin’s neck came drawn along;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And upward he extended both his wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Between the middle list and three and three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that he injured none by cleaving it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So high they rose that they were lost to sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His limbs were gold, so far as he was bird,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And white the others with vermilion mingled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not only Rome with no such splendid car</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">E’er gladdened Africanus, or Augustus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But poor to it that of the Sun would be⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of the Sun, which swerving was burnt up</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At the importunate orison of Earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Jove was so mysteriously just.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three maidens at the right wheel in a circle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came onward dancing; one so very red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in the fire she hardly had been noted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The second was as if her flesh and bones</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had all been fashioned out of emerald;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The third appeared as snow but newly fallen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now they seemed conducted by the white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now by the red, and from the song of her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The others took their step, or slow or swift.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the left hand four made holiday</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vested in purple, following the measure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of one of them with three eyes m her head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In rear of all the group here treated of</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two old men I beheld, unlike in habit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But like in gait, each dignified and grave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One showed himself as one of the disciples</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that supreme Hippocrates, whom nature</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made for the animals she holds most dear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Contrary care the other manifested,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sword so shining and so sharp, it caused</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Terror to me on this side of the river.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereafter four I saw of humble aspect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And behind all an aged man alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Walking in sleep with countenance acute.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like the foremost company these seven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were habited; yet of the flower-de-luce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No garland round about the head they wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of the rose, and other flowers vermilion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At little distance would the sight have sworn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all were in a flame above their brows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when the car was opposite to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thunder was heard; and all that folk august</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemed to have further progress interdicted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There with the vanward ensigns standing still.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-30" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Beatrice.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When the Septentrion of the highest heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Which never either setting knew or rising,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor veil of other cloud than that of sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And which made everyone therein aware</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his own duty, as the lower makes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whoever turns the helm to come to port)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Motionless halted, the veracious people,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That came at first between it and the Griffin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turned themselves to the car, as to their peace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one of them, as if by Heaven commissioned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Singing, “<i xml:lang="">Veni, sponsa, de Libano</i>”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shouted three times, and all the others after.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as the Blessed at the final summons</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall rise up quickened each one from his cavern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uplifting light the reinvested flesh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So upon that celestial chariot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A hundred rose <i xml:lang="">ad vocem tanti senis</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ministers and messengers of life eternal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They all were saying, “<i xml:lang="">Benedictus qui venis</i>,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, scattering flowers above and round about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“<i xml:lang="">Manibus o date lilia plenis.</i>”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere now have I beheld, as day began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The eastern hemisphere all tinged with rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the other heaven with fair serene adorned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sun’s face, uprising, overshadowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that by tempering influence of vapors</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For a long interval the eye sustained it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus in the bosom of a cloud of flowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which from those hands angelical ascended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And downward fell again inside and out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over her snow-white veil with olive cinct</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Appeared a lady under a green mantle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vested in color of the living flame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my own spirit, that already now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long a time had been, that in her presence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trembling with awe it had not stood abashed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without more knowledge having by mine eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through occult virtue that from her proceeded</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of ancient love the mighty influence felt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as on my vision smote the power</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sublime, that had already pierced me through</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere from my boyhood I had yet come forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the left hand I turned with that reliance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which the little child runs to his mother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When he has fear, or when he is afflicted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To say unto Virgilius: “Not a drachm</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of blood remains in me, that does not tremble;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I know the traces of the ancient flame.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But us Virgilius of himself deprived</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had left, Virgilius, sweetest of all fathers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Virgilius, to whom I for safety gave me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor whatsoever lost the ancient mother</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Availed my cheeks now purified from dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That weeping they should not again be darkened.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Dante, because Virgilius has departed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do not weep yet, do not weep yet awhile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For by another sword thou need’st must weep.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’en as an admiral, who on poop and prow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Comes to behold the people that are working</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In other ships, and cheers them to well-doing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the left hand border of the car,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When at the sound I turned of my own name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of necessity is here recorded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw the Lady, who erewhile appeared</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Veiled underneath the angelic festival,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Direct her eyes to me across the river.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although the veil, that from her head descended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Encircled with the foliage of Minerva,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did not permit her to appear distinctly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In attitude still royally majestic</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Continued she, like unto one who speaks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And keeps his warmest utterance in reserve:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Look at me well; in sooth I’m Beatrice!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How didst thou deign to come unto the Mountain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Didst thou not know that man is happy here?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine eyes fell downward into the clear fountain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, seeing myself therein, I sought the grass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So great a shame did weigh my forehead down.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to the son the mother seems superb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So she appeared to me; for somewhat bitter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tasteth the savour of severe compassion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silent became she, and the Angels sang</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suddenly, “<i xml:lang="">In te, Domine, speravi:</i>”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But beyond <i xml:lang="">pedes meos</i> did not pass.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as the snow among the living rafters</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the back of Italy congeals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blown on and drifted by Sclavonian winds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then, dissolving, trickles through itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whene’er the land that loses shadow breathes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that it seems a fire that melts a taper;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’en thus was I without a tear or sigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before the song of those who sing forever</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After the music of the eternal spheres.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when I heard in their sweet melodies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Compassion for me, more than had they said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“O wherefore, lady, dost thou thus upbraid him?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ice, that was about my heart congealed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To air and water changed, and in my anguish</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through mouth and eyes came gushing from my breast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She, on the right-hand border of the car</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still firmly standing, to those holy beings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus her discourse directed afterwards:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ye keep your watch in the eternal day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that nor night nor sleep can steal from you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One step the ages make upon their path;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore my answer is with greater care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he may hear me who is weeping yonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the sin and dole be of one measure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not only by the work of those great wheels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That destine every seed unto some end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">According as the stars are in conjunction,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But by the largess of celestial graces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which have such lofty vapors for their rain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That near to them our sight approaches not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such had this man become in his new life</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Potentially, that every righteous habit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would have made admirable proof in him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But so much more malignant and more savage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Becomes the land untilled and with bad seed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more good earthly vigour it possesses.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some time did I sustain him with my look;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Revealing unto him my youthful eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I led him with me turned in the right way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as ever of my second age</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I was upon the threshold and changed life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himself from me he took and gave to others.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When from the flesh to spirit I ascended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And beauty and virtue were in me increased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I was to him less dear and less delightful;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And into ways untrue he turned his steps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pursuing the false images of good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never any promises fulfil;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor prayer for inspiration me availed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By means of which in dreams and otherwise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I called him back, so little did he heed them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So low he fell, that all appliances</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his salvation were already short,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save showing him the people of perdition.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For this I visited the gates of death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto him, who so far up has led him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My intercessions were with weeping borne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God’s lofty fiat would be violated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If Lethe should be passed, and if such viands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should tasted be, withouten any scot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of penitence, that gushes forth in tears.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-31" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Reproaches of Beatrice and Confession of Dante⁠—The Passage of Lethe.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“O thou who art beyond the sacred river,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turning to me the point of her discourse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That edgewise even had seemed to me so keen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She recommenced, continuing without pause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Say, say if this be true; to such a charge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy own confession needs must be conjoined.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My faculties were in so great confusion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the voice moved, but sooner was extinct</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than by its organs it was set at large.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awhile she waited; then she said: “What thinkest?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Answer me; for the mournful memories</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In thee not yet are by the waters injured.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confusion and dismay together mingled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forced such a Yes! from out my mouth, that sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was needful to the understanding of it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as a crossbow breaks, when ’tis discharged</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too tensely drawn the bowstring and the bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with less force the arrow hits the mark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So I gave way beneath that heavy burden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Outpouring in a torrent tears and sighs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the voice flagged upon its passage forth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence she to me: “In those desires of mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which led thee to the loving of that good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beyond which there is nothing to aspire to,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What trenches lying traverse or what chains</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Didst thou discover, that of passing onward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou shouldst have thus despoiled thee of the hope?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what allurements or what vantages</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the forehead of the others showed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thou shouldst turn thy footsteps unto them?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the heaving of a bitter sigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hardly had I the voice to make response,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with fatigue my lips did fashion it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weeping I said: “The things that present were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With their false pleasure turned aside my steps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soon as your countenance concealed itself.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she: “Shouldst thou be silent, or deny</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What thou confessest, not less manifest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would be thy fault, by such a Judge ’tis known.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when from one’s own cheeks comes bursting forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The accusal of the sin, in our tribunal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the edge the wheel doth turn itself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still, that thou mayst feel a greater shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thy transgression, and another time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hearing the Sirens thou mayst be more strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cast down the seed of weeping and attend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So shalt thou hear, how in an opposite way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My buried flesh should have directed thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never to thee presented art or nature</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pleasure so great as the fair limbs wherein</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I was enclosed, which scattered are in earth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if the highest pleasure thus did fail thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By reason of my death, what mortal thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should then have drawn thee into its desire?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou oughtest verily at the first shaft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of things fallacious to have risen up</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To follow me, who was no longer such.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou oughtest not to have stooped thy pinions downward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wait for further blows, or little girl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or other vanity of such brief use.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The callow birdlet waits for two or three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to the eyes of those already fledged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vain the net is spread or shaft is shot.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as children silent in their shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stand listening with their eyes upon the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And conscious of their fault, and penitent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So was I standing; and she said: “If thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hearing sufferest pain, lift up thy beard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thou shalt feel a greater pain in seeing.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With less resistance is a robust holm</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uprooted, either by a native wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or else by that from regions of Iarbas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than I upraised at her command my chin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when she by the beard the face demanded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well I perceived the venom of her meaning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as my countenance was lifted up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mine eye perceived those creatures beautiful</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had rested from the strewing of the flowers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, still but little reassured, mine eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saw Beatrice turned round towards the monster,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is one person only in two natures.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath her veil, beyond the margent green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She seemed to me far more her ancient self</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To excel, than others here, when she was here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So pricked me then the thorn of penitence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of all other things the one which turned me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most to its love became the most my foe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such self-conviction stung me at the heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’erpowered I fell, and what I then became</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She knoweth who had furnished me the cause.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, when the heart restored my outward sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lady I had found alone, above me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw, and she was saying, “Hold me, hold me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up to my throat she in the stream had drawn me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, dragging me behind her, she was moving</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the water lightly as a shuttle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I was near unto the blessed shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Asperges me,” I heard so sweetly sung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remember it I cannot, much less write it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The beautiful lady opened wide her arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Embraced my head, and plunged me underneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where I was forced to swallow of the water.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then forth she drew me, and all dripping brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the dance of the four beautiful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each one with her arm did cover me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘We here are Nymphs, and in the Heaven are stars;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere Beatrice descended to the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We as her handmaids were appointed her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We’ll lead thee to her eyes; but for the pleasant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Light that within them is, shall sharpen thine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The three beyond, who more profoundly look.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus singing they began; and afterwards</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the Griffin’s breast they led me with them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Beatrice was standing, turned towards us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“See that thou dost not spare thine eyes,” they said;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Before the emeralds have we stationed thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence Love aforetime drew for thee his weapons.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand longings, hotter than the flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fastened mine eyes upon those eyes relucent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That still upon the Griffin steadfast stayed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in a glass the sun, not otherwise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within them was the twofold monster shining,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now with the one, now with the other nature.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Think, Reader, if within myself I marvelled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I beheld the thing itself stand still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in its image it transformed itself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While with amazement filled and jubilant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My soul was tasting of the food, that while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It satisfies us makes us hunger for it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Themselves revealing of the highest rank</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In bearing, did the other three advance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Singing to their angelic saraband.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Turn, Beatrice, O turn thy holy eyes,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such was their song, “unto thy faithful one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who has to see thee ta’en so many steps.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In grace do us the grace that thou unveil</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy face to him, so that he may discern</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The second beauty which thou dost conceal.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O splendour of the living light eternal!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who underneath the shadow of Parnassus</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has grown so pale, or drunk so at its cistern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would not seem to have his mind encumbered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Striving to paint thee as thou didst appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where the harmonious heaven o’ershadowed thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When in the open air thou didst unveil?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-32" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Tree of Knowledge.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So steadfast and attentive were mine eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In satisfying their decennial thirst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all my other senses were extinct,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And upon this side and on that they had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Walls of indifference, so the holy smile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drew them unto itself with the old net</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When forcibly my sight was turned away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towards my left hand by those goddesses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because I heard from them a “Too intently!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that condition of the sight which is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In eyes but lately smitten by the sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bereft me of my vision some short while;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to the less when sight reshaped itself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I say the less in reference to the greater</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Splendour from which perforce I had withdrawn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw upon its right wing wheeled about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The glorious host returning with the sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the sevenfold flames upon their faces.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As underneath its shields, to save itself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A squadron turns, and with its banner wheels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before the whole thereof can change its front,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That soldiery of the celestial kingdom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which marched in the advance had wholly passed us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before the chariot had turned its pole.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to the wheels the maidens turned themselves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the Griffin moved his burden benedight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But so that not a feather of him fluttered.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lady fair who drew me through the ford</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Followed with Statius and myself the wheel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which made its orbit with the lesser arc.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So passing through the lofty forest, vacant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By fault of her who in the serpent trusted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Angelic music made our steps keep time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perchance as great a space had in three flights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An arrow loosened from the string o’erpassed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As we had moved when Beatrice descended.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I heard them murmur altogether, “Adam!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then circled they about a tree despoiled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of blooms and other leafage on each bough.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its tresses, which so much the more dilate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As higher they ascend, had been by Indians</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among their forests marvelled at for height.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Blessed art thou, O Griffin, who dost not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pluck with thy beak these branches sweet to taste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since appetite by this was turned to evil.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After this fashion round the tree robust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The others shouted; and the twofold creature:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Thus is preserved the seed of all the just.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And turning to the pole which he had dragged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He drew it close beneath the widowed bough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And what was of it unto it left bound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the same manner as our trees (when downward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Falls the great light, with that together mingled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which after the celestial Lasca shines)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begin to swell, and then renew themselves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each one with its own color, ere the Sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Harness his steeds beneath another star:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Less than of rose and more than violet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A hue disclosing, was renewed the tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had erewhile its boughs so desolate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I never heard, nor here below is sung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hymn which afterward that people sang,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor did I bear the melody throughout.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had I the power to paint how fell asleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those eyes compassionless, of Syrinx hearing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those eyes to which more watching cost so dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as a painter who from model paints</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I would portray how I was lulled asleep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He may, who well can picture drowsihood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore I pass to what time I awoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And say a splendour rent from me the veil</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of slumber, and a calling: “Rise, what dost thou?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to behold the apple-tree in blossom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which makes the Angels greedy for its fruit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And keeps perpetual bridals in the Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peter and John and James conducted were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, overcome, recovered at the word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which still greater slumbers have been broken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saw their school diminished by the loss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not only of Elias, but of Moses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the apparel of their Master changed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So I revived, and saw that piteous one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above me standing, who had been conductress</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aforetime of my steps beside the river,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all in doubt I said, “Where’s Beatrice?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she: “Behold her seated underneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The leafage new, upon the root of it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold the company that circles her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rest behind the Griffin are ascending</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With more melodious song, and more profound.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if her speech were more diffuse I know not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because already in my sight was she</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who from the hearing of aught else had shut me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone she sat upon the very earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Left there as guardian of the chariot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which I had seen the biform monster fasten.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Encircling her, a cloister made themselves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The seven Nymphs, with those lights in their hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which are secure from Aquilon and Auster.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Short while shalt thou be here a forester,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thou shalt be with me for evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A citizen of that Rome where Christ is Roman.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore, for that world’s good which liveth ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fix on the car thine eyes, and what thou seest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having returned to earth, take heed thou write.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus Beatrice; and I, who at the feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her commandments all devoted was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My mind and eyes directed where she willed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never descended with so swift a motion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fire from a heavy cloud, when it is raining</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From out the region which is most remote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I beheld the bird of Jove descend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down through the tree, rending away the bark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As well as blossoms and the foliage new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he with all his might the chariot smote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat it reeled, like vessel in a tempest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tossed by the waves, now starboard and now larboard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereafter saw I leap into the body</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the triumphal vehicle a Fox,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemed unfed with any wholesome food.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for his hideous sins upbraiding him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Lady put him to as swift a flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As such a fleshless skeleton could bear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then by the way that it before had come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the chariot’s chest I saw the Eagle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Descend, and leave it feathered with his plumes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And such as issues from a heart that mourns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A voice from Heaven there issued, and it said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“My little bark, how badly art thou freighted!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Methought, then, that the earth did yawn between</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both wheels, and I saw rise from it a Dragon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who through the chariot upward fixed his tail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as a wasp that draweth back its sting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drawing unto himself his tail malign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drew out the floor, and went his way rejoicing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That which remained behind, even as with grass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A fertile region, with the feathers, offered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps with pure intention and benign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reclothed itself, and with them were reclothed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The pole and both the wheels so speedily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sigh doth longer keep the lips apart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transfigured thus the holy edifice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrust forward heads upon the parts of it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three on the pole and one at either corner.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first were horned like oxen; but the four</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had but a single horn upon the forehead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A monster such had never yet been seen!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Firm as a rock upon a mountain high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seated upon it, there appeared to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A shameless whore, with eyes swift glancing round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as if not to have her taken from him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upright beside her I beheld a giant;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever and anon they kissed each other.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But because she her wanton, roving eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turned upon me, her angry paramour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did scourge her from her head unto her feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then full of jealousy, and fierce with wrath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He loosed the monster, and across the forest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dragged it so far, he made of that alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shield unto the whore and the strange beast.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="purgatorio-canto-33" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The River Eunoe.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Deus venerunt gentes,” alternating</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now three, now four, melodious psalmody</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The maidens in the midst of tears began;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Beatrice, compassionate and sighing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Listened to them with such a countenance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That scarce more changed was Mary at the cross.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when the other virgins place had given</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For her to speak, uprisen to her feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With color as of fire, she made response:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="">Modicum, et non videbitis me;</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i xml:lang="">Et iterum,</i> my sisters predilect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i xml:lang="">Modicum, et vos videbitis me.</i>”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then all the seven in front of her she placed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after her, by beckoning only, moved</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me and the lady and the sage who stayed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So she moved onward; and I do not think</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her tenth step was placed upon the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When with her eyes upon mine eyes she smote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with a tranquil aspect, “Come more quickly,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To me she said, “that, if I speak with thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To listen to me thou mayst be well placed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as I was with her as I should be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She said to me: “Why, brother, dost thou not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Venture to question now, in coming with me?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As unto those who are too reverential,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Speaking in presence of superiors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who drag no living utterance to their teeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It me befell, that without perfect sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began I: “My necessity, Madonna,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You know, and that which thereunto is good.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she to me: “Of fear and bashfulness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Henceforward I will have thee strip thyself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that thou speak no more as one who dreams.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Know that the vessel which the serpent broke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was, and is not; but let him who is guilty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Think that God’s vengeance does not fear a sop.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without an heir shall not forever be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Eagle that left his plumes upon the car,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence it became a monster, then a prey;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For verily I see, and hence narrate it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The stars already near to bring the time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From every hindrance safe, and every bar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within which a Five-hundred, Ten, and Five,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One sent from God, shall slay the thievish woman</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that same giant who is sinning with her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And peradventure my dark utterance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Themis and the Sphinx, may less persuade thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since, in their mode, it clouds the intellect;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But soon the facts shall be the Naiades</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who shall this difficult enigma solve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without destruction of the flocks and harvests.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Note thou; and even as by me are uttered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These words, so teach them unto those who live</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That life which is a running unto death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bear in mind, whene’er thou writest them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not to conceal what thou hast seen the plant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That twice already has been pillaged here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whoever pillages or shatters it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With blasphemy of deed offendeth God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who made it holy for his use alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For biting that, in pain and in desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Five thousand years and more the firstborn soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Craved Him, who punished in himself the bite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy genius slumbers, if it deem it not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For special reason so preeminent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In height, and so inverted in its summit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if thy vain imaginings had not been</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Water of Elsa round about thy mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Pyramus to the mulberry, their pleasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou by so many circumstances only</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The justice of the interdict of God</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Morally in the tree wouldst recognize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But since I see thee in thine intellect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Converted into stone and stained with sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the light of my discourse doth daze thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will too, if not written, at least painted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou bear it back within thee, for the reason</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That cinct with palm the pilgrim’s staff is borne.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I: “As by a signet is the wax</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which does not change the figure stamped upon it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My brain is now imprinted by yourself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wherefore so beyond my power of sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soars your desirable discourse, that aye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more I strive, so much the more I lose it?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“That thou mayst recognize,” she said, “the school</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which thou hast followed, and mayst see how far</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its doctrine follows after my discourse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mayst behold your path from the divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Distant as far as separated is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From earth the heaven that highest hastens on.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence her I answered: “I do not remember</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever I estranged myself from you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor have I conscience of it that reproves me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And if thou art not able to remember,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Smiling she answered, “recollect thee now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thou this very day hast drunk of Lethe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if from smoke a fire may be inferred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such an oblivion clearly demonstrates</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some error in thy will elsewhere intent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Truly from this time forward shall my words</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be naked, so far as it is befitting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lay them open unto thy rude gaze.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And more coruscant and with slower steps</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sun was holding the meridian circle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, with the point of view, shifts here and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When halted (as he cometh to a halt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who goes before a squadron as its escort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If something new he find upon his way)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ladies seven at a dark shadow’s edge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as, beneath green leaves and branches black,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Alp upon its frigid border wears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In front of them the Tigris and Euphrates</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Methought I saw forth issue from one fountain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And slowly part, like friends, from one another.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O light, O glory of the human race!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What stream is this which here unfolds itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From out one source, and from itself withdraws?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For such a prayer, ’twas said unto me, “Pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Matilda that she tell thee;” and here answered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one does who doth free himself from blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The beautiful lady: “This and other things</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were told to him by me; and sure I am</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The water of Lethe has not hid them from him.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Beatrice: “Perhaps a greater care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which oftentimes our memory takes away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has made the vision of his mind obscure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Eunoe behold, that yonder rises;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lead him to it, and, as thou art accustomed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Revive again the half-dead virtue in him.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like gentle soul, that maketh no excuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But makes its own will of another’s will</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As soon as by a sign it is disclosed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even so, when she had taken hold of me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The beautiful lady moved, and unto Statius</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said, in her womanly manner, “Come with him.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If, Reader, I possessed a longer space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For writing it, I yet would sing in part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the sweet draught that ne’er would satiate me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But inasmuch as full are all the leaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made ready for this second canticle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The curb of art no farther lets me go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the most holy water I returned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Regenerate, in the manner of new trees</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That are renewed with a new foliage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pure and disposed to mount unto the stars.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
